B
Fire Safety
Building
Regulations
2006
Technical 
Guidance
Document
Reprinted Edition
2020
Amendments & Corrections
 Incorporated
Prepared by the Department of Housing, Planning and Local 
Government 
 
housing.gov.ie

AN ROINN COMHSHAOIL
Building Regulations 2006
Technical Guidance Document B
Fire Safety
BAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
ARNA FHOILSIÚ AG OIFIG AN tSOLÁTHAIR 
Le ceannach díreach ó 
FOILSEACHÁIN RIALTAIS, 
52 FAICHE STIABHNA, BAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 2 
(Teil: 01 – 6476834 nó 1890 213434; Fax 01 – 6476843)
__________
DUBLIN 
PUBLISHED BY THE STATIONERY OFFICE 
To be purchased from  
GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS,  
52 ST. STEPHEN'S GREEN, DUBLIN 2. 
(Tel: 01 – 6476834 or 1890 213434; Fax: 01 – 6476843)
_______________________

© Government of Ireland 2020

Amendments and Corrections issued since publication
Technical Guidance Document B – Fire Safety
Amd. 
No.
Text affected
B(i) 
Where reference is made in the Technical Guidance Document, to “the Minister for the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government”, this should be replaced with “the Minister for 
Housing, Planning, and Local Government” 
 
B(ii) 
Introduction 
 
Insert after “The revisions to the 1997 edition of Technical Guidance Document B primarily relate 
to the implementation of new fire performance standards under the EU Construction Products 
Directive – CPD (89/106/EEC); and to consequential amendments of Part B (Fire Safety) of the 
Second Schedule to the Regulations, as inserted by the Building Regulations (Amendment) 
Regulations, 2006.” 
 
The following text: 
 
“The amendments and corrections (B(i) – B(xvii)) to this document relate primarily to buildings 
containing flats (including new guidance on open plan flats). 
 
In general, Technical Guidance Document B, 2017, Fire Safety – Volume 2 – Dwelling Houses 
provides guidance in relation to Part B of the second schedule to the Building Regulations as 
amended by S.I. No. 57/2017 - Building Regulations (Part B Amendment) Regulations 2017. This 
TGD B: 2017 deals only with dwelling houses.” 
B(iii) 
Transitional Arrangements
Insert after “The 1997 edition of Technical Guidance Document B – Fire Safety, ceases to have effect 
from I June 2006, except in the case of projects benefiting from the foregoing transitional 
arrangements.” the following text :   
 
“The amendments and corrections B(iii) – B(xvii) incorporated in this document apply to the design 
of works, or buildings in which a material change of use takes place, where the works or the change 
of use commence or takes place, as the case may be on or after 1 July 2020, except where: 
 
I) a planning application is made on or before 30 June 2020 for planning permission or approval 
pursuant to the Planning and Development Act 2000 (No. 30 of 2000), or 
2) a notice pursuant to the provisions of Part 8 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 
(S.I. No. 600 of 2001) has been published on or before 30 June 2020, or 
3) a notice from An Bord Pleanála, pursuant to the provisions of Section 6 (7)(b) of the Planning and 
Development (Housing) and Residential Tenancies Act 2016 (No. 17 of 2016), for a Strategic Housing
 Development has been issued on or before 30 June 2020, or 
4) a fire safety certificate under the Building Control Regulations, 1997 has been granted on or 
before 30 June 2020, 
 
and substantial work has been completed by 
. 
 
“Substantial work has been completed” means that the structure of the external walls of the building 
has been erected.”
30 June 2023

Delete from the Introduction, the following paragraphs:
 
The Construction Products Directive 
 
Progress / Prospect 
 
Standards Cited 
 
Pending European Standards 
 
EU Commission decisions and guidance papers 
 
Harmonised products standards 
 
B(iv) 
Insert after 0.1.4 the following text: 
 
“Tall and Complex buildings containing Flats. 
 
0.1.5 As the height of buildings containing flats increases, the complexity, and risks presented to 
occupants and firefighters may also increase. Therefore, for tall buildings containing flats (purpose 
group 1 (c)), adequate provisions which are reasonable and proportionate to the risks presented by 
the particular building design, in addition to the provisions set out in this document, should be 
considered.  
 
In very tall buildings containing flats (purpose group 1 (c)), a fire safety engineering approach (see 
0.2.4), that takes into account the total fire safety package, should be considered. In using such an 
approach, the factors contained in 0.2.2, and measures specified in 0.2.3 should be addressed.” 
 
Replace “0.1.5” with “0.1.6”, and “0.1.6” with “0.1.7” 
 
B(v) 
Section 1.0.8 
 
Replace “Guidance  with  regard  to  the  provision of means of escape are outlined in 1.1 to 1.5 of 
this Section (B1).” with the following text  
 
“Guidance with regard to the provision of means of escape are outlined in 1.1 to 1.8 of this Section 
(B1).” 
 
B(vi) 
Section 1.0.8 
 
Insert after “Sub-section 1.5 sets out provisions for means of escape in dwelling houses, including 
provisions in the case of conversion of lofts in houses to habitable accommodation.” the following 
text:  
 
“Sub-section 1.6 sets out provisions for means of escape in open plan flats.   
 
Sub-section 1.7 sets out additional provisions for means of escape in protected corridors / lobbies in 
buildings containing flats.  
 
Sub-section 1.8 sets out provisions for sprinklers in flats.” 
 
B(vii) 
Section 1.0.9 
 
Insert definition of open plan flat: “Open plan flat - A flat with no protected entrance hallway.” 
 
B(viii) Section 1.0.11.2
Replace “0.1.4 and 0.1.5” with “0.1.4, 0.1.5 and 0.1.6”

B(ix) 
Section 1.1.2 
 
Replace: “- Sub-section 1.4 (general provisions for means of escape) of this Technical Guidance 
Document.” 
 
With the following text: “Sub-sections 1.4 (general provisions for means of escape), 1.6 (open plan 
flats), 1.7 (protected corridors / lobbies serving all flats), and 1.8 (domestic sprinkler systems), of this 
Technical Guidance Document.” 
B(x) 
Section 1.4.14.4 
Replace the following text “In a building containing flats or maisonettes, purpose group 1(c), 
individual dwellings should be provided with a fire detection and alarm system complying with the 
provisions set out in 1.5.5 of this Document (a maisonette should be treated as a two storey 
dwelling house for this purpose). 
 
In addition to alarms within individual dwellings, there are situations where a common fire detection 
and alarm system should also be provided. This will be the case in mixed occupancy type buildings 
(see 1.4.14.3) but may also be required in a building containing flats only 
 
In a building containing flats, where the compartment floors and walls (see 3.2.5) are not constructed 
of non-combustible materials, a type L3X fire detection and alarm system in accordance with I.S. 
3218: 1989 should be provided for the protection of the common escape routes from the flat 
entrance doors to a place of safety. 
 
In a building containing flats, where the compartment floors and walls (see 3.2.5) are constructed of 
non-combustible materials, a manual fire alarm (type M) system in accordance with I.S. 3218: 1989 
should be provided in the common escape routes from the flat entrance doors to a place of safety” 
 
With the following text:  
 
“In a building containing flats, or maisonettes, Purpose Group 1(c), individual dwellings (except open 
plan flats) should be provided with a fire detection and alarm system complying with the provisions 
set out in I.5.5 of this Document (a maisonette should be treated as a two storey dwelling house for 
this purpose). 
 
Open plan flats should be provided with a fire detection and alarm system complying with the 
provisions set out in 1.6.3(d) of this Document. 
 
In addition to alarms within individual dwellings, in a building containing flats where the flats are 
accessed by common protected corridors / lobbies / stairways, a common fire detection and alarm 
system should be provided. It should be designed to provide adequate warning in the case of fire.  
 
This system should not be connected to any alarms within individual dwellings provided in 
accordance with 1.5.5 or 1.6.3(d).  
 
It should consist of:
(i) a heat detector in each flat, located adjacent to the entrance door to the flat,
(ii) a sounder in each flat, meeting the requirements of EN 54-3, located in the circulation area,
not more than 5 m from any bedroom door,
(iii) smoke detectors and sounders in all common escape routes, and
(iv) smoke or heat detectors (as appropriate) in ancillary accommodation.”

B (xi) 
Section 1.4.15 
 
Insert after “Where access for people with disabilities is provided to a building or part of a building 
in accordance with Part M of the Second Schedule to the Building Regulations, provision should also 
be made, in the building or part of the building (as the case may be) for appropriate means of escape 
for such people.”  
 
the following text: “This provision also applies to buildings containing flats.” 
 
Insert after “A lift may be used for evacuation where it meets the criteria outlined in section 10 of 
BS 5588: Part 8”  
 
The following text: “Refuge areas in buildings containing flats should be provided in a place of relative 
safety, within the enclosure of a common protected stairway, or within any protected corridor / 
lobby, adjacent to the stairway. This protected corridor / lobby should not provide direct access to a 
flat or to ancillary accommodation and should provide direct access to the stairway.” 
 
B(xii) 
Insert after Section1.5 the following text:  
 
“1.6 Open Plan Flats 
 
Introduction 
 
1.6.1 This section provides additional guidance (see 1.1.2) for means of escape provisions for open 
plan flats, which are accessed directly from a common protected corridor / lobby, or an open 
balcony / deck approach.  
 
The provisions of 1.6.3 do not apply to small, single staircase buildings (see 1.1.2), where a flat is 
accessed directly from the stair, which relies upon the internal protected entrance hall for lobby 
protection to the staircase enclosure.  
 
1.6.2 General requirements. Where an open plan flat is provided, each door between the flat 
and a protected corridor / lobby, or an open balcony / deck approach, should have a fire resistance 
equal to the fire resistance of the wall, but not more than 60 minutes, in accordance with Appendix 
B. 
 
1.6.3 Internal Layouts. The means of escape requirements in open plan flats are determined by 
the maximum travel distance within the flat. Where the travel distance is less than or equal to 9 m, 
the provisions of 1.1.2 apply. Where the maximum travel distance exceeds 9 m, and where the 
appropriate alternate means of escape (see 1.1.2) has not been provided, the following provisions 
apply (see Diagram 9A):
(a) 
a sprinkler system in accordance with Section 1.8 should be provided, 
 
(b) 
the flat should be situated on a single storey only,
(c) 
the travel distance from any point in the flat to the final exit from the flat should not 
exceed 20 m,
(d) 
a fire detection and alarm system should be provided. It should consist of 
interconnected, self-contained, mains powered / battery backed smoke / heat alarms 
(Grade D), which should be provided in the following locations:

(i) all circulation areas that form part of an escape route within the dwelling,
(ii) all high fire risk areas/rooms e.g. kitchen, living rooms, utility rooms, and
(iii) all bedrooms, and
(e) 
the kitchen: 
 
(i) should be enclosed in storey height construction, which need not be fire resisting, or  
 
(ii) if not enclosed, the flat layout should be designed such that an occupant escaping the
flat should not have to approach within 1.8 m of the main kitchen cooking appliance.  
 
A main kitchen cooking appliance is a cooking apparatus with a fixed connection to the dwelling's gas 
or electric energy infrastructure (for example, an oven and/or hob).”

1.7 Protected Corridors / Lobbies Serving all Flats 
 
 
Introduction 
 
This section provides additional guidance (see 1.1.2) for protected corridors / lobbies which provide 
means of escape from flats.   
 
 
1.7.1 Corridor / Lobby Travel Distances in buildings with a Single Stairway 
 
All common protected corridors / lobbies which have direct access to a flat should be ventilated by 
means of a smoke control system.  
 
An exception to this requirement is a building with a topmost floor level of less than 11 m. In such a 
building, where a smoke control system is not provided, the maximum travel distance (see 1.1.2) is 
4.5 m. 
 
The maximum travel distance in a protected corridor / lobby provided with a smoke control system 
(see 1.7.2), irrespective of the topmost floor level, is 7.5 m.  
 
Where every flat to a protected corridor / lobby on the same storey is provided with a sprinkler 
system (see 1.8), and the same protected corridor(s) / lobby(s) are provided with a smoke control 
system, the travel distance on that storey can be further extended up to a maximum of 15 m. 
 
The travel distance should be measured from the furthest entrance door to a flat to the protected 
stair, or lobby door. The lobby should provide direct access to the stair and should not provide 
direct access to a flat or ancillary accommodation.  
 
1.7.2 Smoke Control System for Protected Corridors / Lobbies 
 
A smoke control system for a protected corridor / lobby is installed to facilitate escape in corridors 
/ lobbies. The smoke control system should be designed to ventilate the protected corridor / lobby 
for means of escape. The smoke control system should be activated by means of an appropriate fire 
detection and alarm system.  
 
The smoke control system should consist of (a), (b), or (c), as follows:
(a) an automatic opening vent having a clear openable area of not less than 1 m2 fitted at the top 
of the stairway enclosure, and an automatic opening vent(s) (AOV) from the protected corridor 
/ lobby to the exterior of the building, which should be in accordance with the following:
(i) it should have a minimum free area of 1.5 m2,
(ii) it should be fitted as close to the top of the ceiling of the protected corridor / lobby as
is practicable, but be at least as high as the top of the door connecting the protected 
corridor / lobby to the stairwell or lobby. 
 
Where there are multiple AOV’s due to multiple corridors, the system should be designed to 
activate the relevant AOV only. The AOV’s from the common protected corridors / lobbies on 
all other floors should remain closed.

(b) an automatic opening vent having a clear openable area of not less than 1 m2 situated at the 
top of the stairway enclosure, and an automatic opening vent to a natural smoke shaft, which 
should be in accordance with 1.7.3 below.
(c) a mechanical smoke control system which has a proven equivalent performance to (a) or (b) 
above. 
 
In a building with a floor level at more than 20 m above ground level, the provision of an adequate 
smoke control system to a protected corridor / lobby may be sufficient to ventilate the firefighting 
lobby (see 5.3). 
 
Where any smoke control system is powered by electricity, the system should be capable of 
operating at all material times.  
 
 
1.7.3 Natural Smoke Shafts in buildings containing Flats 
 
Natural Smoke Shafts in buildings containing flats should be closed at the base. Replacement air is 
provided from the automatic opening vent in the stairwell to help the efficiency of the shaft system.  
 
Natural smoke shafts should meet the following specific recommendations:
(i) 
the smoke shaft should have a minimum cross-sectional area of 1.5 m2 (minimum 
dimension 0.85 m in any direction), 
(ii) 
the minimum ventilation area from the protected corridor / lobby into the shaft, and at 
the opening at the head of the shaft, and at all internal locations within the shaft (e.g. 
safety grilles) should be at least 1m2,  
(iii) 
the top of the protected corridor / lobby vent should be located as close to the ceiling 
of the protected corridor / lobby as is practicable, and should be at least as high as the 
top of the door connecting the protected corridor / lobby to the stairwell or lobby, 
(iv) 
the shaft should extend a minimum length of 2.5 m above the ceiling of the highest 
storey which is served by the shaft, 
(v) 
the opening at roof level should be at least 0.5 m above any surrounding structures 
within a horizontal distance of 2.0 m, 
(vi) 
the smoke shaft should be constructed in accordance with 3.2.7.1, 
(vii) 
the ventilation openings from the protected corridor / lobby to the vent shaft should 
achieve the same fire performance as the shaft, but not exceeding 60 minutes, 
(viii) 
no services other than those relating to the smoke shaft should be contained within the 
smoke shaft, 
(ix) 
the shaft should be vertical from base to head but may have not more than 4 m at an 
inclined angle not more than 30◦ from the vertical plane, 
(x) 
the design of the system should be such that, on activation of the fire detection and 
alarm system, the ventilator on the fire floor, the ventilator at the top of the smoke shaft 
and the 1m2 ventilator at the head of the stairway should all open simultaneously. 
 
Where there are multiple shafts due to multiple corridors, the system should be designed to 
activate the relevant shaft only. The ventilators from the common protected corridors / lobbies 
on all other floors, and unaffected corridors on the fire floor should remain closed.

1.8 Domestic Sprinkler Systems  
 
Introduction 
 
This section provides guidance in relation to sprinkler systems in buildings containing flats. 
 
1.8.1 Where a sprinkler system is provided, it should be in accordance with BS 9251:2014, or 
equivalent. The system should have the following as minimum requirements:
(a) a minimum duration of operation of 30 minutes, 
(b) a flow rate of 4 mm/min for single head operation, or 2.8 mm/min through each sprinkler
operating simultaneously up to a maximum of two sprinklers in a single area of operation, 
(c) a primary and an alternative power supply,  
(d) a duty and standby pump, and  
(e) an on-site water storage capacity, suitable to meet the flow requirements and duration of
the system, but not less than 3 m3. 
 
An isolation valve should be provided to each individual flat. It should be located within the flat, near 
to the main entrance door, and should be readily accessible.” 
B 
(xiii)
Section 5.3.2 
 
Insert after: “Every firefighting stairway and firefighting lift should be approached through a 
firefighting lobby (see Diagram 33).” 
 
The following text:  
 
“In a building containing flats (Purpose Group 1(c)) (see 1.1.2), a firefighting lobby should be 
provided. There should not be direct access to a flat or ancillary accommodation from a firefighting 
lobby. The firefighting lobby facilitates ongoing evacuation of occupants, and concurrent firefighting 
operations.” 
B 
(xiv)
Diagram 33 
 
Replace the current Diagram 33 with the following Diagram 33:

B(xv) 
Paragraph 5.3.4 
 
Replace “BS 5588 Part 5: 1991” with “BS 5588 Part 5: 2004”
B 
(xvi)
FD 30S 
 
FD *S 
B 
(xvii)
Table B1  
 
Replace 2 (a) with the following text  
“2 (a) (i) if it separates a flat (other than an open plan flat), or maisonette, 
from a space in common use:  
(ii) if it separates an open plan flat from a space in common use:”
E 30Sa   
 
E *Sa
Appendix F 
 
Insert after: “BS 6387: 1994 Specification for performance requirements for cables required  to  
maintain  circuit  integrity  under fire conditions” 
 
the following text:  
 
“BS 9251:2014 Fire sprinkler systems for domestic and residential occupancies – Code of practice”

Contents
Page
INTRODUCTION
2
SECTION B3
INTERNAL FIRE SPREAD 
(STRUCTURE)
70
Introduction
The guidance
Existing buildings
Technical specifications
Materials and workmanship
3
Interpretation
3.0
Introduction to provisions
72
3.1 Load-bearing elements of
structure
74
3.2 Compartmentation
76
3.3
Concealed spaces (cavities)
88
 3.4 Protection of openings and
Part B: The Requirement
5
fire stopping
96
3.5
Special provisions 
 100
SECTION B0
FIRE SAFETY
6
SECTION B4
EXTERNAL FIRE SPREAD
103
0.1
Use of the guidance
0.2
Alternative approaches to fire
4.0
Introduction to provisions
105
4.1 Construction of external walls
106
4.2 Space separation
109
4.3 Roof coverings
116
safety requirements                               8
 0.3 Provisions common to Sections 
       B1 to B5                                                9
SECTION B1
MEANS OF ESCAPE IN 
CASE OF FIRE
12
SECTION B5
ACCESS AND FACILITIES FOR 
THE FIRE SERVICE
119
1.0
Introduction to provisions
14
1.1
Means of escape provisions
for different purpose groups
and building types
20
1.2
Design for horizontal escape
23
1.3
Design for vertical escape
35
1.4
General provisions for means
5.0
Introduction to provisions
121
5.1 Fire mains
123
5.2 Vehicle access
126
5.3 Personnel access
130
5.4 Areas requiring special
consideration
131
of escape
44
1.5
Dwelling houses
53
1.6    Open plan flats
59
1.7    Protected corridors / lobbies serving all    
         flats                                                    60
1.8    Domestic Sprinkler Systems                 61
APPENDICES
A
Performance of materials and 
structures
136
SECTION B2
INTERNAL FIRE SPREAD (LININGS) 62
B
Fire doors
154
C    Methods of measurement
157
D    Definitions
161
E     Assessment of risk in industrial
2.0
Introduction to provisions
64
2.1 Provisions meeting the 
requirement
67
2.2
Variations and special provisions
67
2.3 Thermo-plastic materials
68
and storage buildings
164
F
Reference standards
166
G    Reference publications
171
1

Building Regulations 2006
Technical Guidance Document B - Fire Safety
Introduction
This document has been published by the Minister 
for the  Housing, Planning and Local Government, under
Article 7 of the Building Regulations, 1997.  It 
provides guidance in relation to Part B of the 
Second Schedule to the Regulations, as amended.
A specific construction product complying with the CPD 
must be accepted from the date of availability of such 
product.
The 1997 edition of Technical Guidance Document B –
Fire Safety, ceases to have effect from I June 2006, except 
in the case of projects benefiting from the foregoing 
transitional arrangements.
The revisions to the 1997 edition of Technical Guidance
Document B primarily relate to the implementation of
new  fire  performance  standards  under  the  EU
Construction  Products  Directive  –  CPD  (89/106/EEC);
and   to consequential amendments of Part B (Fire Safety)
of the Second Schedule to the Regulations, as inserted by
the Building Regulations (Amendment) Regulations, 2006.
The
 amendments
 and
 corrections
 B(iii)  –
 B(xvii)
 incorporated  in  this  document  apply  to  the  design  of
 works, or buildings in which a material change of use takes
 place, where the works or the change of use commence or
 takes  place,  as  the  case  may  be  on  or  after  1 July 
2020 except where -
The  amendments  and  corrections  (B(i)  –  B(xvii))  to  this
 document  relate  primarily  to  buildings  containing  flats
 (including new guidance on open plan flats).
(1) a planning application is made on or before 30 June    
     2020 for planning permission or approval pursuant to 
     the Planning and Development Act 2000 (No. 30 of    
     2000) or,
In  general,  Technical  Guidance  Document  B,  2017,  Fire 
Safety – Volume 2 – Dwelling Houses provides guidance in
 relation to Part B of the second schedule to the Building 
Regulations  as  amended  by  S.I.  No.  57/2017  -  Building 
Regulations (Part B Amendment) Regulations 2017. This 
TGD B: 2017 deals only with dwelling houses.
(2) a notice pursuant to the provisions of Part 8 of the      
     Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (S.I. No.   
     600 of 2001) has been published on or before             
     30 June 2020, or
(3) a notice from An Bord Pleanála, pursuant to the           
     provisions of Section 6 (7)(b) of the Planning and          
     Development (Housing) and Residential Tenancies Act  
     2016 (No. 17 of 2016), for a Strategic Housing             
     Development has been issued on or before                  
     30 June 2020, or
In general, Building Regulations apply to the construction
of  new  buildings  and  to  extensions  and  material 
alterations  to buildings.  In addition, certain parts of the
Regulations apply to existing buildings where a material 
change  of  use  takes  place. 
 Otherwise,  Building
Regulations do not apply to buildings constructed prior to
1 June 1992.
(4) a Fire Safety Certificate under the Building Control 
     Regulations, 1997 has been granted on or before    
     30 June 2020,
Transitional Arrangements
and  substantial  work  has  been  completed  by  
30 June 2023.
to the design of works, or buildings
in which a material change of use takes place, where the
works or the change of use commence or takes place, as
the case may be on or after
This document applies
“Substantial  work  has  been  completed”  means  that  the 
structure  of  the  external  walls  of  the  building  has  been 
erected.
1 June 2006 except where-
(1) a planning application is made on or before 31 May
2006 for planning permission or approval pursuant to
the Planning and Development Act 2000 (No. 30 of
2000), or
(2) a notice pursuant to the provisions of Part 8 of the
Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (No. 600
of 2001) is published on or before 31 May 2006, or
(3) a Fire Safety Certificate under the Building Control
Regulations, 1997 has been granted on or before 31
May 2006
provided substantial work has been completed on or
before 31 May 2009.
2

The Guidance
The materials, methods of construction, standards and
other specifications (including technical specifications)
which are referred to in this document are those which
are likely to be suitable for the purposes of the
Regulations.  Where works are carried out in accordance
with the guidance in this document, this will, prima facie,
indicate compliance with Part B of the Second Schedule of
the Building Regulations.  However, the adoption of an
approach other than that outlined in the guidance  is not
precluded provided that the relevant requirements of the
Regulations are complied with.  Those involved in the
design and construction of a building may be required by
the relevant building control authority to provide such
evidence as is necessary to establish that the requirements
of the Building Regulations have been complied with.  In
the case of an application for a fire safety certificate under
the Building Control Regulations, it is necessary to
demonstrate compliance with Part B of the Second
Schedule to the Building Regulations.
Materials and Workmanship
Under Part D of the Second Schedule to the Building
Regulations, works to which the Regulations apply must
be carried out with proper materials and in a workmanlike
manner.  Guidance in relation to compliance with these
requirements is contained in Technical Guidance
Document D.
Interpretation
In  this  document,  a  reference  to  a  section, 
sub-section, part, paragraph or diagram is, unless 
otherwise  stated,  a reference  to  a  section, 
sub-section,  part,  paragraph  or diagram,  as  the 
case  may  be,  of  this  document.  A  reference  to 
another Technical Guidance Document is a reference to 
the latest edition of a document published by the Minister
 for  Housing,  Planning  and  Local  Government  under 
article 7 of the Building Regulations, 1997. Diagrams are 
used in this document to illustrate particular aspects of 
construction  -  they  may  not  show  all  the  details  of 
construction.
Existing Buildings
In the case of material alterations or changes of use of
existing buildings, the adoption of the guidance in this
document without modification may not, in all
circumstances, be appropriate.  In particular, the
adherence to guidance including co
s, standards or
technical specifications, intended for application to new
work may be unduly restrictive or impracticable.
Buildings of architectural or historical interest are
especially likely to give rise to such circumstances.  In
these situations, alternative approaches based on the
principles contained in the document may be more
relevant and should be considered.
de
Technical Specifications
Building Regulations are made for specific purposes, e.g. to
provide, in relation to buildings, for the health, safety and
welfare of persons, the conservation of energy and access
for people with disabilities.  Technical specifications
(including harmonised European Standards, European
Technical Approvals, National Standards and Agrément
Certificates) are relevant to the extent that they relate to
these considerations.
Any reference to a technical specification is a reference to
 so much of the specification as is relevant in the context 
in  which  it  arises.  Technical  specifications  may  also 
address other aspects not covered by the Regulations.
A reference to a technical specification is to the latest
edition (including any amendments, supplements or
addenda) current at the date of publication of this
Technical Guidance Document.  However, if this version
of the technical specification is subsequently revised or
updated by the issuing body, the new version may be used
as a source of guidance provided that it continues to
address the relevant requirements of the Regulations.
3

This page left intentionally blank
4

Fire Safety
Building Regulations - The Requirement
Part B of the Second Schedule to the Building Regulations, 1997, provides as follows:
Means of escape in case
B1
A building shall be so designed and constructed that there are adequate
of fire.
means of escape in case of fire from the building to a place of safety 
outside the building, capable of being safely and effectively used.
Internal fire spread 
B2
For the purpose of inhibiting the spread of fire within a building, the 
(linings).
internal linings -
(a)
shall have, either a rate of heat release or a rate of fire
growth and a resistance to ignition which is reasonable in
the circumstances
(b)
shall offer adequate resistance to the spread of flame over
their surfaces
Internal fire spread
B3
(1)
A building shall be so designed and constructed that, in the
(structure).
event of fire, its stability will be maintained for a reasonable
period.
(2)
(a)
A wall common to two or more buildings shall be so 
designed and constructed that it offers adequate 
resistance to the spread of fire between those 
buildings.
(b)
A building shall be sub-divided with fire resisting
construction where this is necessary to inhibit the
spread of fire within the building.
(3)
A building shall be so designed and constructed that the unseen
spread of fire and smoke within concealed spaces in its
structure or fabric is inhibited where necessary.
(4)
For the purposes of sub-paragraph 2(a), a house in a terrace
and a semi-detached house are each to be treated as being a
separate building.
External fire spread.
B4
The external walls and roof of a building shall be so designed and 
constructed that they afford adequate resistance to the spread of fire 
to and from neighbouring buildings.
Access and facilities for
B5
A building shall be so designed and constructed that there is adequate 
the fire service.
provision for access for fire appliances and such other facilities as 
may be reasonably required to assist the fire service in the protection 
of life and property.
5

Section B0
Fire Safety
0.1
Use of the Guidance
Interaction between these different requirements
should be recognised where variations in the
standard of provision are being considered. A higher
standard under one of the requirements may be of
benefit in respect of one or more of the other
requirements. Thus the provisions in the Document
as a whole should be considered as a package aimed
at achieving an acceptable standard of fire safety.
Arrangements of Sections
0.1.1
The provisions set out in Sections B1 to B5
of this Document, deal with different aspects of fire
safety. The five sections, in addition to this one
dealing with general provisions, are :
B1
Means of escape in case of fire 
B2
Internal fire spread (linings) 
B3
Internal fire spread (structure) 
B4
External fire spread 
B5 
Access and facilities for the fire 
service
Performance Statements
0.1.3
At the start of Sections B1 to B5, the
relevant requirement of the Regulations is set out
and is followed by a performance statement which
indicates how the requirement may be met.  These
statements incorporate the essential elements
required to satisfy the Regulations and form the basis
for the provisions contained in the guidance.
B1 aims to ensure that a satisfactory standard of
means of escape is provided for persons in the event
of fire in a building;
B2 aims to ensure that fire spread over the internal
linings of buildings is inhibited;
Alternative Solutions
0.1.4
The detailed provisions set out in this
Document are intended to provide guidance for
some of the more common building situations.  In
other situations, alternative ways of achieving
compliance with the requirements of Part B of the
Second Schedule to the Building Regulations may be
appropriate.  There is no obligation to adopt any
particular solution contained herein.  The use of
alternative design solutions, standards, systems or
methods of fire protection to those outlined in this
document are acceptable, provided the level of fire
safety achieved is adequate to satisfy the
requirements of the Building Regulations.
B3 aims to ensure the stability of buildings in the
event of fire, that there is a sufficient degree of fire
separation within buildings and between adjoining
buildings, and to inhibit the unseen spread of fire and
smoke in concealed spaces in buildings;
B4 aims to ensure that external walls and roofs have
adequate resistance to the spread of fire over their
external surfaces, and that spread of fire from one
building to another is restricted; and
B5 aims to ensure satisfactory access for fire
appliances to buildings and facilities in buildings to
assist fire fighters in the protection of life and
property.
Alternative approaches (see 0.2) based on fire safety
engineering may be employed to satisfy the
requirements of the Regulations.  These may be
based on a fundamental analysis of the fire safety
problem or involve a comparative analysis between a
provision of this technical guidance document and an
alternative solution.  Where appropriate,
compensating fire safety measures should be
considered and evaluated.  A qualitative assessment
of the alternative design may be adequate in some
cases, but generally quantitative analysis will also be
required.
Interaction of Provisions
0.1.2
Whilst provisions appropriate to B1 to B5
are set out separately in this Document, many of the
provisions are closely interlinked.  For example,
there is a close link between the provisions for
means of escape (B1) and those for the control of
fire growth (B2), fire containment (B3), and facilities
for the fire service (B5). Similarly there are links
between B3 and the provisions for controlling
external fire spread (B4), and between B3 and B5.
6

Tall and Complex buildings containing Flats.
-
Architectural Heritage Protection Guidelines for
Planning Authorities Chapter 6 (page 89) and
Chapter 17 published by the Heritage Section
DOEHLG 2005;
0.1.5  As  the  height  of  buildings  containing  flats
 increases,  the  complexity,  and  risks  presented  to
 occupants  and  firefighters  may  also  increase. 
Therefore,  for  tall  buildings  containing  flats 
(Purpose Group 1(c)),  adequate  provisions which 
are  reasonable  and  proportionate  to  the  risks 
presented  by  the  particular  building  design,
 in 
addition to the provisions set out in this document, 
should be considered.
-
Fire protection in old buildings and historic town
centres, published by the Fire Protection
Association;
-
Fire protection measures for the Royal Palaces,
Department of National Heritage, London;  and
In very tall buildings containing flats (Purpose Group 
1  (c)),  a  fire  safety  engineering  approach  (see 
0.2.4), that  takes  into  account  the  total  fire  safety 
package,  should  be  considered.  In  using  such  an 
approach,  the  factors  contained  in  0.2.2,  and 
measures specified in 0.2.3 should be addressed.
-
Heritage under fire, a guide to the protection of
historic buildings by the United Kingdom
Working Party on Fire Safety in historic
buildings.
Fire Safety Management
Existing Buildings
0.1.7
Whilst the provisions of the Building
Regulations do not relate to the management of fire
safety in buildings, it would be appropriate and
prudent to consider the importance of this aspect to
the overall fire safety of a building.  The guidance
contained in this Document has been based on the
assumption that there will be an adequate level of
fire safety management when the building is in use.
0.1.6
In the case of an existing building there may
be constraints that would not exist with a new
building and some variation of the provisions set out
in this Document may be appropriate.  Alternative
solutions (see 0.1.4), whether applied to all or part
of the building or to specific provisions, may be
employed in these situations.
Many fire safety provisions are inter-dependant and
should not be considered in isolation.  Where a
particular provision outlined in this Document can
not be practicably achieved, account may be taken of
compensating fire safety measures, depending on the
nature and circumstances of each particular case.
Such measures would include active and / or passive
provisions.  Active provisions are those which come
into action on detection of fire (such as fire
suppression systems) while passive provisions relate
to the defence against fire provided by the fabric and
construction of a building (such as floors and walls).
Active fire safety measures, such as automatic fire
detection and alarms systems, smoke control
systems or automatic suppression systems, may play
a critical role in the fire safety strategy of a building.
The management of such systems during the life of
the building is an important consideration.
The management of passive systems, which include
the fire protection provided by the fabric and
construction of the building (including components
such as fire doors, shutters, dampers, etc.) is also
important, to ensure that deterioration over the life
of a building will not impair the level of fire safety.
Further guidance on effective and feasible
recommendations and selection criteria for the use
of passive fire protection (PFP) systems in buildings is
given in “Ensuring best practise for passive fire
protection in buildings” published by the Association
of Specialist Fire Protection (ASFP).
Attention is drawn to duties under the Fire Services
Acts, 1981 and 2003 in relation to the use of certain
premises.  Attention is also drawn to duties under
the Safety, Health and Welfare at Work Act, 2005 in
relation to a place of work as defined in that
legislation.
A number of useful publications are available which
outline alternative approaches to fire safety in
existing buildings of special or historic merit.  These
include:
The Department has published a number of Codes
of Practice / Guides to Fire Safety for various
existing purpose groups.  These are listed in
Appendix G.
7

-     the degree of fire safety management including   
      the likely standard of maintenance of the fire   
      safety systems,
0.2
Alternative Approaches to
Fire Safety requirements
0.2.1
Rigid compliance with the provisions set out
in this document might prove unduly restrictive in
the design of some large and complex buildings.  A
fire safety engineering approach that takes into
account the total fire safety package can provide an
alternative approach to providing  fire safety.  In such
cases it would be appropriate to take into account a
range of fire safety features, some of which are dealt
with in this Document, and some of which are not
addressed in any detail, and to set these against an
assessment of the hazard and risk peculiar to the
particular case.
-
consideration of the availability of any continuing
control under other legislation that could ensure
continued maintenance of such systems.
0.2.4
A fire safety engineering approach can
provide a more fundamental solution than traditional
prescriptive approaches to fire safety.  It may be the
only viable means of achieving a satisfactory standard
of fire safety in some large and complex buildings.
Shopping centres (see 3.5.3) or large buildings
containing atria (see 3.5.5) are examples of where
this approach can be used.
The fire safety engineering design process includes a
qualitative assessment of the design, a quantified
analysis and a comparison with defined safety
criteria.
Fire safety engineering may also be used to
demonstrate the adequacy of alternative solutions to
those outlined in this Technical Guidance Document.
This approach may also be appropriate in the case of
existing buildings or where a particular provision of
the guidance can not practicably be achieved.
The adequacy of the fire safety design should be
assessed on the basis of appropriate life safety
criteria, using the following alternative approaches:
0.2.2
Factors that should be taken into account
include:
(a)
a probabilistic or risk-based approach;
(b) a deterministic approach, which establishes the
worst credible fire scenarios to be considered
in detail, with the addition of appropriate safety
factors; or
(c)
a comparison of the performance of a proposed
alternative solution with that achieved using the
guidance in this Technical Guidance Document.
-
the risk of a fire occurring,
-
the resulting fire severity,
-
the fire safety measures provided,  and
-
the risk to persons in the event of a fire
occurring.
0.2.3
A wide variety of measures could be
considered and incorporated to a greater or lesser
extent, as appropriate to the circumstances. These
include:
In the case of a fundamental analysis and depending
on the life risks involved, the uncertainties in the
initial assumptions and the design procedures used,
safety factors are required to ensure an adequate
level of safety.
-
the adequacy of the means to prevent fires
occurring,
-
early warning by automatic fire detection and
alarm systems,
-
the means of escape provided,
-
provision of smoke control systems,
-
control of the rate of growth of a fire,
-
the adequacy of the structure to resist the
effects of a fire,
-
the degree of fire containment,
-
fire separation between buildings or parts of
buildings,
-
the standard of active measures for fire
In the case of a comparative analysis, inherent or
implied safety factors could be used to ensure that
the design adopted will provide a level of safety at
least equivalent to that achieved by the use of a
prescribed design solution.
In the case of a probabilistic risk assessment the
likelihood of a given event occurring should be
shown to be acceptably low.  The life risk analysis
involves considering the probability of a fire starting
and heat and smoke spreading to produce untenable
conditions in an occupied part of the building.
Comparative risk assessment studies may be used to
show that an alternative design solution is at least as
safe as that achieved by a prescribed design solution.
extinguishment or control,
-
facilities to assist the fire service,
8

0.3
Provisions common to 
Sections B1 to B5
Further guidance on fire safety engineering principles
is contained in the following publications:
0.3.1
Under  the  provisions  in  this  Document
there are a number of items that are common 
to one  or  more  of  the  requirements.  These 
include  a classification  of  purpose  groups,  fire 
performance
 of
materials
 and
 structures, 
provisions  regarding  fire  doors,  methods  of 
measurement and definitions. For convenience these
 and  other  appropriate  items  have  been  drawn 
together  for  common  reference  as  Appendices  to 
this Document.
-
BS 7974: 2001 – Application of fire safety
engineering principles to the design of
buildings 
and 
associated 
Published
Documents (PD’s),
-
CIBSE Guide E – Fire Engineering and
Introduction to fire safety engineering of
structures published by The Chartered
Institution of Building Services Engineers, London
2003
Purpose Groups
-
SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering,
3rd Edition published by The Society of Fire
Protection Engineers USA.
0.3.2
Many of the provisions in this Document are
related to the use of the building. The use
classifications are termed purpose groups and from
this it follows that the relevant purpose group should
be decided before the provisions can be determined.
Codes of Practice
Suitable references to other guidance material are
also contained in many of the codes of practice and
other documents referred to in Section B1 (1.1) of
this Technical Guidance Document.
Purpose groups can apply to a whole building,
or (where a building is compartmented) to a
compartment in the building, and the relevant
purpose group should be taken from the main use of
the building or compartment.  However, in some
situations there may be more than one use involved
in a building or compartment, and in certain
circumstances it is appropriate to treat the different
uses as belonging to a purpose group in its own
right.  These situations are:
0.2.5
Fire is a complex phenomenon and there are
on-going developments in the field of fire safety
engineering to improve the understanding of fire
behaviour and its consequences.
Many analytical models, which are based on
mathematical relationships necessary for a set of fire
conditions to exist, have been developed.
Computer-based models are now also available to
predict the behaviour of fire and its consequences.
Care should be exercised in the use of fire models,
to ensure the validity of the results.  An
understanding of the parameters, assumptions and
limitations of the model, the accuracy and proper
application of the input data and the correct
interpretation of the output, is always required.
(a)
a flat or maisonette;
(b)
storage for a shop if the area of storage is more
than one-half of the total floor area of the shop;
and
(c)
in other buildings, any ancillary use if its area is
more than one-quarter of the total floor area of
the building or part.
Some buildings may have two or more main uses
that are not ancillary to one another, for example,
offices over shops from which they are independent.
In such cases, each of the uses should be considered
as belonging to a purpose group in its own right.
Guidance on fire modelling and its application is
available in the following publications:
-
Building Research Establishment Report (BR223)
Mathematical fire modelling and its application to
fire safety design;
-
Building Research Establishment Digest 367,
1991 Fire modelling;
In other cases and particularly in some large buildings
there may be a complex mix of uses. In such cases it
is necessary to consider the possible risk that one
part of a complex may have on another and special
measures to reduce the risk may be necessary.
Table 0.1 sets out the purpose group classification.
-
Fire Models, A Guide for Fire Prevention
Officers, Fire Research and Development Group
(BT Hume).
9

Table 0.1
Classification of buildings by purpose group
Use
Group
Purpose for which a building or compartment of a building is used
Residential
1(a)(1)
Dwelling house with no storey with a floor level which is more than 4.5m above
(Dwellings)
ground level.
1(b)(1)
Dwelling house with a storey with a floor which is more than 4.5 m above ground
level.
1(c)
Flat or maisonette.
Residential
2(a)
Hospital, nursing home, home for old people or for children, school or other 
(Institutional)
similar establishment used as living accommodation or for the treatment, care or 
maintenance of people suffering from illness or mental or physical disability or
handicap, where such people sleep on the premises.
Other Residential
2(b)
Hotel, hostel, guest building, residential college, hall of residence, and any other 
residential purpose not described above.
Office
3
Premises used for the purpose of administration, clerical work (including writing, book 
keeping, sorting papers, filing, typing, duplicating, machine calculating, drawing and the 
editorial preparation of matter for publication, handling money (including banking and 
building society work), telephone system operation).
Shop
4(a)
Premises used for a retail or wholesale trade or business (including retail sales by
auction, self-selection and over-the-counter wholesale trading, the business of lending 
books or periodicals for gain and the business of a barber or hairdresser) and premises 
to which the public is invited to deliver or to collect goods in connection with their 
hire, repair or other treatment, or where they themselves may carry out such repairs 
or other treatments.
Shopping Centre 
4(b)
A building which comprises a number of individually occupied premises to which 
common access is provided principally for the benefit of shoppers.
Assembly and 
5
Place of assembly (2) or recreation, including the following:
recreation
(i)
a theatre, public library, hall or other building of public resort used for social or
recreational purposes,
(ii)
a non-residential school or other educational establishment,
(iii)
a place of public worship
(iv)
a public house, restaurant or similar premises used for the sale to members of the
public of food or drink for consumption on the premises.
(v)
a sports pavilion, stadium, grandstand, or other spectator accommodation.
(vi)
a terminus, station or other facility for air, rail, road or sea travel.
Industrial (3)
6
Factories and other premises used for manufacturing, altering, repairing, cleaning, 
washing, breaking-up, adapting or processing any article, generating power or 
slaughtering livestock.
Storage (3)
7(a)
Place for storage or deposit of goods or materials (other than described under 7(b))
7(b)
Car parks designed to admit and accommodate only cars,
Other 
non-residential
8
Any other non-residential purpose not included in any other purpose group
Notes:
(1)
Purpose Groups 1(a) and 1(b) include any surgery, consulting rooms, office or other accommodation not exceeding
50 m2 in total, forming part of a dwelling and used by the occupant of the dwelling in a professional or business
capacity.
(2)
A building may not be treated as a place of assembly solely because it is a building to which members of the public are
occasionally admitted.
(3)
Appendix E gives guidance on the assessment of risk in industrial and storage buildings.  The risk category of such
buildings will determine many of the fire safety provisions required.
10

Assessment of Risk in Tall and Very Tall 
buildings containing Flats
Fire Performance of Materials and
Structures
0.3.3
Many of the provisions throughout this
publication are given in terms of performance in
relation to standard fire test methods. Details are
drawn together in Appendix A and reference is
made where appropriate in Sections B1 to B5.
0.3.8  As  building  height  increases,  so  does  the 
complexity  and  risks  presented  to  occupants  and 
firefighters. Therefore, for such buildings, additional 
measures may need to be considered.
For  buildings  containing  flats  (purpose  group  
1(c)), buildings  with  a  floor  level  greater  than  30  
m  may  require  additional  provisions  to  the 
requirements specified in this document, such as the 
provision  of  a  sprinkler  system  (see  1.8),  the 
appropriateness  of  the  smoke  control  system,  or 
other measures.
Fire Doors
0.3.4
Provisions in respect of fire doors are set
out in Appendix B.  Fire doors play a significant part
in the fire safety of a building.  It is important to note
that a fire door refers to a complete door assembly
and not the door leaf alone.  This point is further
emphasised in sub-section 1.4 and in Appendix B.
In very tall buildings containing flats (purpose group 
1(c)),  a  holistic  fire  safety  engineering  approach  
(see 0.2.4)  that  takes  into  account  the  total  fire  
safety package  should  be  considered.  In  using  
such  an  approach,  the  factors  contained  in  
0.2.2,  and  measures  specified  in  0.2.3  should  be 
addressed
Methods of measurement
0.3.5
Some form of measurement is an integral
part of many of the provisions in this publication, and
methods of measurement are set out in Appendix C
(except for those methods particular to B1 set out in
par. 1.0.10 to that Part).
Fire Safety objectives
0.3.9
As outlined in the introduction to this
Document, Building Regulations are made for specific
purposes.  Part B of the Second Schedule to the
Building Regulations is therefore primarily concerned
with the health, safety and welfare of persons.  The
fire safety measures outlined in this guidance
document are intended for the protection of life
from fire.
Definitions
0.3.6
Whilst definitions that are only relevant to
one of the sections in this publication are given in
that section, there are other defined terms that are
relevant to more than one section. These are
defined in Appendix D, and for convenience, that
Appendix lists terms that are also defined elsewhere.
Reference Standards and Publications
Assessment of Risk in Industrial and
Storage buildings
0.3.10 For convenience, standards and other
references in this Document are listed in Appendices
F and G respectively.
0.3.7
The purpose groups set out in Table 0.1 can
encompass a broad range of activity within an
individual group. This range may affect the
determination of appropriate safety requirements.
Appendix E sets out guidelines for assessment of risk
in Industrial and Storage buildings (Purpose Group 6
and 7(a) respectively).
11

Section B1
Means of Escape in case of Fire
Means of escape in case 
B1
A building shall be so designed and constructed that there are 
of fire.
adequate means of escape in case of fire from the building to a 
place of safety outside the building, capable of being safely and 
effectively used.
Performance
The requirement of B1 may be met:
(a) if there are routes of sufficient number and size,
which are suitably located, to enable persons to
escape to a place of safety in the event of fire;
(b) if the routes are sufficiently protected from the
effects of fire in terms of enclosure, where
necessary, and in the use of materials on the
routes; and
(c) if sufficient lighting, means of smoke control and
an alarm system to warn the occupants of the
existence of fire are provided to enable them to
use the routes safely;
all to an extent necessary that is dependent on the
use of the building, its size and height.
12

Contents
Page
Page
1.0
Introduction to provisions
•
General
14
•
Analysis of the problem
•
Criteria for means of escape
•
Alternative means of escape
15
•
Unprotected and protected
escape routes
•
Progressive horizontal escape in
hospitals and similar buildings
•
Security
•
Use of the document
•
Definitions
16
•
Methods of measurement
18
•
Application to existing buildings
18
1.4
General provisions for means 
of escape
•
Introduction
44
•
Protection of escape routes
•
Doors on escape routes
•
Construction of escape
stairways
45
•
Height of escape routes
46
•
Floors of escape routes
•
Final exits
•
Lighting of escape routes
47
•
Lifts
•
Electrical installations and
protected circuits
49
•
Ventilation systems
•
Refuse chutes and storage
•
Fire safety signs
50
•
Fire detection and alarm systems
•
Provisions for people with disabilities 51
•
First-aid fire-fighting equipment
52
•
Heat producing appliances
1.1
Means of Escape Provisions for
different purpose groups and
building types.
•
Dwelling houses
20
•
Flats and maisonettes
•
Hospitals
•
Offices
•
Shop and shopping centres
•
Assembly and recreation
21
•
Other building types
22
1.5
Dwelling houses
•
Introduction
53
•
Dwelling houses with no floors
4.5 m above ground level
•
Dwelling houses with one floor
more than 4.5 m above ground
level
•
Dwelling houses with more than
one floor more than 4.5 m above
ground level
54
•
Fire detection and alarm systems
for dwelling houses
55
•
Windows for escape or rescue
56
•
Loft conversions
57
•
General provisions for dwelling
houses
58
1.2
Design for horizontal escape
•
Introduction
23
•
Number of escape routes and
exits
•
Planning of escape routes and
exits
27
•
Width of escape routes and
exits
29
•
Corridors
30
•
External escape routes
31
•
Evacuation considerations
33
•
Closely seated audiences
34
•
Premises provided with a stage
1.6
Open plan flats
•
Introduction
59
•
General requirements
  59
•
Internal Layouts
  59
1.3
Design for vertical escape
•
Introduction
35
•
Number of escape stairways
•
Single escape stairways
•
Width of escape stairways
•
Calculation of minimum stairway
width
36
1.7
Protected corridors / lobbies serving 
all flats
•
Introduction
60
•
Corridor / lobby travel distances in        
     buildings with a single stairway          60
•
Protection of escape stairways
39
•
Basement stairways
40
•
Protected lobbies and corridors
•
Smoke control system for protected      
      corridors / lobbies                     60
•    Natural Smoke Shafts in residential       
      buildings                                    61
1.8
Domestic sprinkler systems
•
Introduction
61
to escape stairways
•
External escape stairways
42
13

1.0 Introduction to Provisions
the usual sources of origin. It is less likely that the
fire will originate in the structure of the building
itself or in circulation areas, such as passages,
corridors, lobbies or stairways, bearing in mind the
limited combustible contents of such areas, where
these are adequately restricted.
General
1.0.1
The provisions in this Section (B1) are
concerned with the measures necessary to ensure
reasonable facilities for means of escape in case of
fire and with structural fire precautions only where
these are necessary to safeguard escape routes. They
assume that the occupants of buildings will include a
normal proportion of people with disabilities and
that, in the design of the building, reliance should not
be placed on external rescue by the fire brigade. The
Document, therefore, has been prepared on the
basis that the occupants of any part of a building
should be able to escape safely from a building in an
emergency without external assistance. Where it is
proposed to use an alternative approach to that
outlined in this Document, Codes of Practice which
rely on external rescue by fire brigades are not
acceptable. Special considerations, however, apply to
Residential (Institutional) buildings (see pars. 1.0.6
and 1.2.7).
The primary danger associated with fire in its early
stages is not flame but the smoke and noxious gases
produced by the fire. Most of the casualties in fires
have been caused by smoke, which has often also
obscured the way to escape routes and exits.
Measures designed to provide safe means of escape
must, therefore, include provisions to limit the
spread of smoke and fumes.
Criteria for Means of Escape
1.0.3
The basic principles for the design of means
of escape are:
(a) there should be alternative means of escape
wherever possible;
Attention is drawn to the fact that other legislation
may impose requirements for means of escape in
case of fire with which the building must comply, and
which operate when the building is in use. The main
legislation in this area are the Fire Services Acts,
1981 and 2003 and the Safety, Health and Welfare at
Work Act, 2005.
(b) where direct escape to a place of safety is not
possible, the means of escape should consist of
two parts -
- an unprotected escape route which should be
limited in extent and should lead to a
protected escape route, and
- the protected escape route which should lead
to a place of safety.
Analysis of the problem
1.0.2
The design of means of escape from a
building must be based on an appreciation of the
probable behaviour of fire, which may break out in
any part of the building and then spread to other
parts. The overall design of a building should
therefore be carefully analysed part by part to
determine the danger which might arise from a fire,
either in the part where fire may originate or in any
other part of the building to which it may spread.
The ultimate place of safety is, of course, the open
air clear of the effects of the fire. In modern large
and complex buildings, however, reasonable safety
may be reached within the building, provided
planning and protection measures are incorporated
in accordance with the guidance given in this
document.
The following are not acceptable as a means of
escape:
Fires do not normally start in two different places in
a building at the same time, and initially a fire will
create a hazard only in the part in which it starts and
is unlikely at this stage to involve a large area.
Subsequently it may spread to other parts, usually
along the circulation routes of the building.
Furnishings, equipment, services and plant are among
(a) lifts (except a lift which is suitably designed, and
installed for the purpose of evacuation);
(b) passenger conveyors or escalators;
14

(c) portable ladders and throw-out ladders; and
use of unprotected stairways for day-to-day
circulation, but these "accommodation" stairways can
only play a very limited role in terms of means of
escape.
(d) manipulative apparatus and appliances.
Alternative Means of Escape
Progressive Horizontal Escape in
Hospitals and Similar Buildings
1.0.4
There is always the possibility of the path of
a single escape route being rendered impassable by
fire or a concentration of heavy smoke or fumes and,
ideally, people should be able to turn their backs on
a fire wherever it occurs and travel away from it to a
protected escape route leading to a place of safety.
When account is taken, however, of the way the
building is to be used, there are many circumstances
in which it is not reasonably possible to provide
alternative means of escape from all parts of the
floor or building. In limited conditions a dead-end
can be accepted as providing reasonable safety.
These conditions depend on the use of the building
and its inherent fire risk, the size and height of the
building and the numbers of persons accommodated
within the dead-end.
1.0.6
In areas designed for patients in hospitals and
similar buildings the principle of total evacuation of a
building in the event of fire may be initially
inappropriate.
Able-bodied staff employed for the care and
supervision of people in hospitals are normally
available and trained to assist them in escaping from
the immediate danger of fire, although the ratio of
staff to disabled occupants can vary considerably. It
is, therefore, appropriate to adopt the principle of
progressive, staged evacuation of occupants from an
area in which fire occurs to an adjoining area (or
areas) on the same level which affords sufficient
protection from the fire and smoke to enable them
(and the occupants of the adjoining area) to remain
safe until the fire has been dealt with. Progressive
horizontal escape should always be planned to
ensure that, if further stages of evacuation become
necessary, ultimately a protected vertical escape
route is reached. A whole floor would be evacuated
by means of a stairway (or a suitably protected
bed/evacuation lift) only as a last resort if the fire
could not be brought under control. The principle
could be of value to adopt in any Residential
(Institutional) building (Purpose Groups 2(a)).
Unprotected and Protected Escape
Routes
1.0.5
The unprotected part of an escape route is
that part which a person has to traverse before
reaching either the safety of a final exit or the
comparative safety of a protected escape route.
Unprotected escape routes, therefore, should be
limited in extent so that people do not have to travel
excessive distances exposed to the immediate
danger of fire and smoke. Even with protected
horizontal escape routes the distance to a final exit
or protected stairway needs to be limited because
protection is not given indefinitely and the possibility
of premature failure exists.
Security
1.0.7
There is potential for conflict between the
need for easy and rapid evacuation of a building in
case of fire, and the control of entry and exit in the
interest of security. Measures to prevent
unauthorised access can also hinder fire service
entry to rescue people trapped by fire. It is
important that any potential conflicts are identified
and resolved at the design stage and not left to ad-
hoc expedients after completion.
Protected stairways are designed to provide virtually
"fire sterile" areas which lead to places of safety
outside the building. Once inside a protected
stairway, a person can be considered to be safe from
immediate danger from flame and smoke and can
then proceed to a place of safety at his or her own
pace. To enable this to be done, flames, smoke and
other products of combustion must be excluded
from these escape routes (as far as is possible) by
fire and smoke resisting structures or by an
appropriate smoke control system, or a combination
of both these methods. This does not preclude the
Use of the Document
1.0.8
Guidance with regard to the provision of 
means  of  escape  are  outlined  in  1.1  to  1.8  of  this 
Section (B1).
15

Sub-section 1.1 indicates where the appropriate
guidance on means of escape may be obtained.  It
refers to codes of practice and other documents for
different purpose groups and building types, which
should be used where applicable, and to other sub-
sections of this Technical Guidance Document,
where appropriate.
Access level - A level used for normal access to a
building that either incorporates, or leads directly to,
a place of safety.
Accommodation stairway - A stairway additional
to that or those required for escape purposes,
provided for the convenience of occupants.
Sub-sections 1.2 and 1.3 set out the provisions for
means of escape for buildings other than those
where reference is made in 1.1 to codes of practice
or other documents.  For these buildings, guidance
on the provision of means of escape is subdivided
into the following components:
Alternative escape routes - Escape routes
sufficiently separated by either direction and space,
or by fire-resisting construction, to ensure that one
is still available should the other be affected by fire.
Atrium (plural atria) - A space within a building, not
necessarily vertically aligned, passing through one or
more structural floors (other than enclosed lift wells,
enclosed escalator wells, building service ducts, and
enclosed stairways which are not classified as atria).
-
horizontal escape routes (1.2) and
-
vertical escape routes (1.3)
Sub-section 1.4 sets out provisions in respect of the
construction and protection of escape routes
generally and applies to all buildings except dwelling
houses.  The provisions of 1.4 take precedence over
provisions of a similar nature contained in any codes
of practice or other documents referred to in 1.1.
Bedroom - A room within a dwelling, Residential
(Institutional) or Other Residential building which is
used as sleeping accommodation.
Sub-section 1.5 sets out provisions for means of
escape in dwelling houses, including provisions in the
case of conversion of lofts in houses to habitable
accommodation.
Dead-end - Area  from which escape is possible in
one direction only.
Direct distance - The shortest distance from any
point within the floor area, measured within the
external enclosures of the building, to the nearest
storey exit, ignoring walls, partitions and fittings,
other than the enclosing walls/partitions to
protected stairways (2⁄3rd permitted travel distance
can be used for design purposes).
Sub-section  1.6  sets  out  provisions  for  means  of 
escape in open plan flats.
Sub-section  1.7  sets  out  additional  provisions  for 
means of escape in protected corridors / lobbies in 
buildings containing flats.
Emergency lighting - Lighting provided for use
when the power supply to the normal lighting fails.
Sub-section  1.8  sets  out  provisions  for  sprinklers
 in flats.
Escape lighting - That part of the emergency
lighting which is provided to ensure that the escape
route is illuminated at all material times.
Many of the codes of practice and other documents
referred to in 1.1 make references to statutory
provisions which may not be applicable.  These
documents are quoted solely for the purpose of
providing appropriate technical guidance to meet the
requirements of the Building Regulations.
Escape route - A route by which a person may
reach a place of safety, and, in relation to any point
in a building, a route from that point to a place of
safety.
Definitions
1.0.9
The following definitions apply specifically to
B1. Other terms applicable more widely throughout
this Technical Guidance Document are given in
Appendix D.
Evacuation lift - A lift that may be used for the
evacuation of disabled people in a fire.
Final exit - The termination of an escape route
from a building giving direct access to a street,
passageway, walkway or open space, and sited to
Access room - Room through which passes the
only escape route from an inner room.
16

ensure the rapid dispersal of persons from the 
vicinity of a building so that they are no longer in 
danger from fire and/or smoke.
Storey - means any of the parts into which a
building is divided horizontally above or below
ground level but excluding any part of a building
situated above the level of the roof or in the
roofspace, or below the level of the lowest floor,
which is intended for the protection of a water tank,
or lift motor room, or similar use and is not
intended for, or adapted to be used for habitable
purposes, or as a work room, or as a store room.
Habitable room - A room used for living or 
sleeping purposes but does not include a kitchen 
having a floor area less than 6.5 m2, a bathroom, 
toilet or shower room.
Inner room - A room from which escape is 
possible only by passing through an access room.
For the purpose of B1 a storey also includes:
Means of escape - Physical means whereby a safe 
route or routes is or are provided for persons to 
travel from any point in a building to a place of 
safety.
(a) any gallery in an assembly and recreation
building; and
(b) any gallery in any other building if its area
exceeds half of the space into which it projects.
Open  plan  flat  -  A  flat  with  no  protected 
entrance hallway.
Storey exit - A final exit, or a doorway opening
into a protected stairway, firefighting lobby or
external escape route, or a doorway in a
compartment wall that is common to two or more
buildings (a separating wall).
Open spatial planning - The internal arrangement 
of a building in which more than one storey or level 
is contained in one undivided volume e.g. split-level 
floors and balconies or gallery floors overlooking an 
unenclosed atrium (but not atrium galleries used 
only for circulation).
Travel distance - (unless otherwise specified) The
actual distance to be travelled by a person from any
point within the floor area to the nearest storey exit,
having regard to the layout of walls, partitions and
fittings.
Place of Safety - A place, normally in the open air 
at ground level, in which persons are in no danger 
from fire.
Methods of Measurement
Places of special fire risk - Transformer and 
switchgear rooms, large commercial kitchens, boiler 
rooms, fuel or other highly flammable substance 
storage spaces, rooms housing a fixed internal 
combustion engine and areas where flammable 
vapours are likely to be present in the atmosphere. 
Note:  Places of special fire risk may also be 
identified in codes of practice or other documents 
referred to in 1.1 in relation to particular building 
uses.
1.0.10 The following methods of measurement
apply specifically to B1. Other methods of
measurement applicable more widely throughout this
Document are given in the definitions in Appendix
D, and illustrated in Appendix C.
(a) Occupant capacity of a:
(i) room or storey - is the maximum number of
persons it is designed to hold (where this is
known) or the number calculated (using the
occupancy load factors given in Table 1.1)
from -
Pressurization - A method of protecting escape 
routes against the ingress of smoke by maintaining an 
air pressure difference between the route and 
adjoining accommodation.
area of room or storey (m2) 
occupancy load factor
Protected corridor/lobby - A corridor or lobby 
which is adequately protected from fire in adjoining 
accommodation by fire-resisting construction.
Note: ‘area’ excludes stairway enclosures, 
lifts and sanitary  accommodation.
Protected stairway - A stairway which is 
adequately 
protected 
from 
fire 
in 
the 
accommodation through which it passes by fire-
resisting construction and discharges through a final 
exit to a place of safety.
(ii) building or part of a building - is the sum of
the number of occupants of the storeys in
the building or part.
17

(b) Travel distance - is by way of the shortest route,
which if:
Table 1.1
Occupancy load factor
(i) there is fixed seating or other fixed
obstructions, is along the centre line of the
seatways and gangways;
Accommodation (1)
Occupancy load 
factor
1.
Standing area in assembly and
0.3
recreation building
(ii) it includes a stairway, is along the pitch line
on the centre line of travel.
2.
Bar, lounge bar
0.5
(c) Width - The width of:
3.
Restaurant, dining room, meeting
room, committee room, staff room
1.0(2)
(i) a doorway is the clear width when the door
or doors are open.  Door hardware which
does not intrude more than 100 mm into
this width may be ignored. (see Figure 1);
4.
Factory production area, open plan
offices
5.0
Note: It is assumed that the door or doors
are free to open to an angle of at least 90°.
5.
Bedroom or study bedroom
8.0(3)
(ii) an escape route is the width at 1500 mm
above floor level when defined by walls
(handrails fixed to walls which do not
intrude more than 100 mm into this width
may be ignored) or elsewhere the minimum
width of passage available between any fixed
obstructions; and
6.
Offices, kitchen
7.0
7.
Storage building, car park
30.0(4)
Notes:
(1)
Includes categories appropriate to those purpose
groups and building types other than those covered by
codes of practice and other documents outlined in pars.
1.1.1 to 1.1.6.
(iii) a stairway is the clear width between the
walls or balustrades, (strings and handrails
intruding not more than 30 mm and 100 mm
respectively may be ignored).
Where accommodation is not directly covered by the
descriptions given, the nearest reasonable value may be
selected.
(2)
Alternatively the occupant capacity may be taken as the
number of seats provided, if the occupants will normally
be seated.  In the case of continuous seating, a width of
400 mm should be allowed per person.
Figure 1
Measurement of Door Width
(3)
Alternatively the number of bed spaces provided.
(4)
Alternatively 2 persons per parking space.
Clear opening width
Application to Existing Building
1.0.11 The following paragraphs relate to the
application of the means of escape provisions of the
Building Regulations to existing buildings.
1.0.11.1
Alternative documents - The
requirements in relation to means of escape in case
of fire may be met by the use of any appropriate
guidance document, code of practice or standard,
other than those referred to in 1.1, provided the
level of fire safety achieved is adequate to meet the
requirements of the Building Regulations.  Where
18

alternative guidance is used, consideration should be
given to links between the means of escape
provisions and those appropriate to other fire safety
requirements of the Regulations (see 0.1.2).
the application of means of escape provisions,
together with any other provisions in relation to the
protection of escape routes, emergency lighting, fire
detection and alarms, fire suppression and building
services contained in:
1.0.11.2
Alternative solutions - Where it is
impracticable to comply fully with a particular
requirement of this Technical Guidance Document,
it may be necessary to consider alternative solutions
which best fit the particular circumstances (see also
0.1.4,
 0.1.5
 and
 0.1.6).  The  provision  of 
compensating  fire safety  measures  may  also  be 
necessary  and  these could  include  a  range  of 
passive and/or active measures.
-
Any relevant Guide or Code of Practice,
published by the Department of the
Environment, Heritage and Local Government
for the purpose of providing guidance in
relation to satisfying obligations under section
18(2) of the Fire Services Acts, 1981 and 2003.
An example of this type of guidance document is
“Fire Safety in Flats, A Guide to Fire Safety in Flats,
Bedsitters and Apartments” (July, 1994).
1.0.11.3
Compensating measures - Where
compensating fire safety measures for the purposes
of means of escape are provided, the nature and
extent of such provisions will depend on the
circumstances in each particular case.  However such
measures are likely to include some or all of the
following:
A full list of these documents is given in Appendix G
under DOEHLG Publications.
-
Enhanced levels of life safety protection by
automatic fire detection and alarm systems;
-
Reduced travel distances;
-
Enhanced smoke control measures;
-
Pressurisation of stairway enclosures;
-
Protection to escape routes from places of
special fire risk;
-
Enhanced performance of fire doors;
-
Additional structural fire protection measures,
such as increased levels of compartmentation of
the building (see Section B3).
This list is not exhaustive or in any order of
preference and is indicative of the range of options
that may be considered.
1.0.11.4
Material alterations - Where works
constitute a material alteration, and where a material
change of use of the building is not also involved, the
means of escape requirements of the building
regulations for the material alteration may be met by
19

Provisions meeting the Requirement
escape in hospitals is provided in the following:
1.1
Means of Escape Provisions
for Different Purpose Groups 
and Building Types
-
Firecode Health Technical Memorandum 81, Fire
precautions in new hospitals, 1996 (HTM 81:
1996)
Purpose Groups 1(a) and 1(b)
Dwelling Houses
Hospitals, in particular, require that evacuation
procedures be given special consideration in the
design of the means of escape.  The principle of
progressive horizontal evacuation is particularly
relevant.  Guidance on progressive horizontal
evacuation and the provision of compartmentation
for this purpose is contained in Chapters 3 and 5 of
HTM 81: 1996. Compartmentation is also required
for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of
regulation B3 - Internal fire spread (structure) and
guidance on this is contained in 3.2 of this Technical
Guidance Document.
1.1.1
Guidance on means of escape in dwelling
houses, Purpose Group 1(a) and 1(b), including
provisions for conversion of lofts in houses to
habitable accommodation, is provided in:
-
Sub-section 1.5 (dwelling houses) of this
Technical Guidance Document.
Purpose Group 1(c)
Flats and Maisonettes
1.1.2 Guidance on the provision of means  of escape 
in buildings  containing  flats  and   maisonettes, etc. 
Residential(Dwellings),   Purpose  Group  1(c), is 
provided in the following:
Purpose Group 3
Offices
1.1.4
Guidance on the provision of means of
escape in offices is provided in the following:
-
BS 5588: Part 1: 1990, Fire precautions in the
design, construction and use of buildings, Part 1,
Code of practice for residential buildings;
-
BS 5588: Part 11: 1997, Fire precautions in the
design, construction and use of buildings, Part 11.
Code of practice for shops, offices, industrial,
storage and other similar buildings; and
and
-
Sub-sections 1.4 (general provisions for means of
 escape),  1.6  (open  plan  flats),  1.7  (protected 
corridors  /  lobbies  serving  all  flats),  and  1.8 
(domestic  sprinkler  systems),  of  this  Technical 
Guidance Document.
-
Sub-section 1.4 (General Provisions for means of
escape) of this Technical Guidance Document.
Section 3 of BS 5588: Part 11: 1997, contains
recommendations in relation to the provision of
escape routes from offices.  Section 5 contains
recommendations on means of escape for ancillary
accommodation.
Section three of BS 5588: Part 1 1990, contains
recommendations in relation to the internal planning
of flats and maisonettes, escape routes from
dwellings with corridor, lobby or open balcony
approach and vertical escape routes by way of
common stairways.  Recommendations are also
included for stairways in buildings which contain
dwellings and other uses (mixed user buildings).
Where offices form part of a shopping complex,
additional recommendations for this situation are
contained in BS 5588: Part 10: 1991. Fire precautions
in the design, construction and use of buildings, Part
10. Code of practice for shopping complexes.
Section five of BS 5588: Part 1: 1990, contains
recommendations in relation to accommodation
ancillary to flats and maisonettes.
Purpose Group 4(a) and 4(b) 
Shops and Shopping Centres
Purpose Group 2(a) (Part)
Hospitals
1.1.5
Guidance on the provision of means of
escape in shops and shopping centres is provided in
1.1.3
Guidance on the provision of means of
20

the following:
(i)
Assembly and recreation buildings other than
those used as a public house, restaurant, or
similar premises, sports pavilion, stadium,
grandstand or other spectator accommodation
or school:
-
BS 5588: Part 11: 1997, Fire precautions in
the design, construction and use of
buildings, Part 11. Code of practice for
shops, offices, industrial, storage and other
similar buildings; and
Appropriate guidance is contained in the
following:
-
Section 1.4 (General Provisions for means of
escape) of this Technical Guidance Document;
and where appropriate
-
BS 5588: Part 6: 1991, Fire precautions in
the design, construction and use of
buildings, Part 6, Code of practice for
places of assembly; and
-
BS 5588: Part 10: 1991 Fire precautions in the
design, construction and use of buildings, Part 10,
Code of practice for shopping complexes.
-
Sub-section 1.4 (general provisions for
means of escape) of this Technical
Guidance Document.
Section 3 of BS 5588: Part 11: 1997 contains
recommendations in relation to the provision
of escape routes from shops.  Section 5
contains recommendations on means of escape
for ancillary accommodation.
(ii)
Sports pavilion, stadium, grandstand or other
spectator accommodation:
Appropriate guidance is contained in the
following:
Section 4 of BS 5588: Part 10: 1991 contains
recommendations in relation to means of escape in
shopping complexes.  BS 5588: Part 10 also contains
relevant supplementary guidance on means of escape
for other uses, where these form part of a shopping
centre.
-
Code of Practice for Safety at Sports
Grounds, published by the Department of
Education.
In this type of building, where assembly and
recreation areas, other than spectator
accommodation, are also provided (such as a
bar or restaurant), the relevant guidance
outlined at (iv) below should be used.
Although the guidance in BS 5588: Part 11: 1997 is
also relevant to individual shops which are part of a
shopping centre, additional recommendations for
these situations are contained in BS 5588: Part 10.
The recommendations in Chapter 10 of BS 5588:
Part 11 in relation to small premises do not apply
when they are part of a shopping complex.
(iii) Guidance on the provision of means of escape
in schools is provided in the following:
Note: Cafes, restaurants, public houses and other
places of refreshments  are regarded as Places of
Assembly (Purpose Group 5) for the purpose of the
Building Regulations and this Technical Guidance
Document.
-
Department of Education and Science
(UK) Building Bulletin 7, Fire and the
design of educational buildings; and
-
Sub-section 1.4 (general provisions for
means of escape) of this Technical
Guidance Document.
Purpose Group 5
Assembly and Recreation
Recommendations in relation to means of
escape are contained in paragraphs 34 to 91
inclusive of Building Bulletin 7.
1.1.6
Assembly and Recreation use includes a wide
range of building types.  Accordingly the relevant
guidance will vary according to the sub-division, by
building type, outlined below:
Buildings or parts of buildings which form part
of a school or other educational facility may be
21

used for purposes which are outside the scope
of Building Bulletin 7.  Where these occur, they
should comply with the relevant code of
practice or other document outlined in this
sub-section (1.1).
(iv) Buildings used as a public house, restaurant or
similar premises and buildings other than
indicated in (i), (ii) and (iii) above.
Appropriate guidance is contained in sub-
sections 1.2 to 1.4 of this Technical Guidance
Document.
Where another use forms part (other than
where ancillary) of an assembly and recreation
building, the appropriate guidance in this section
should be used.  Where a place of assembly
forms part of a shopping centre, additional
recommendations for these situations are
contained in BS 5588: Part 10 Fire precautions
in the design, construction and use of buildings,
Code of practice for shopping complexes.
Other Purpose Groups
Other Building Types
1.1.7
Guidance on means of escape for buildings
other than those indicated in 1.1.1 to 1.1.6 above is
provided in the following sections of this Technical
Guidance Document:
-
Sub-section 1.2: Design for horizontal escape;
-
Sub-section 1.3: Design for vertical escape; and
-
Sub-section 1.4: General provisions for means of
escape.
22

1.2
Design for Horizontal 
Escape
1.2.2.2
Travel distance - The travel distance (see
1.0.9 for definition) from any point in a room or
storey should not exceed the appropriate values
indicated in Table 1.2 (illustrated in Diagram 1).  The
permitted travel distance will depend on whether
escape is available in one direction only or in more
than one direction.  Escape is available in more than
one direction where alternative escape routes exist
(see 1.2.2.3).
Introduction
1.2.1
The general principle to be followed when
designing facilities for means of escape is that any
person confronted by an outbreak of fire within a
building can turn away from it and make a safe
escape. This sub-section deals with the provision of
means of escape from any point to the storey exit of
the floor in question, for all types of building other
than those covered by codes of practice or other
documents which are referred to in sub-section 1.1.
Note: Travel distance limitations for Purpose Groups
other than those indicated in Table 1.2 are contained
in the appropriate code of practice or other
document referred to in sub-section 1.1.
1.2.2.3 Alternative escape routes - A choice of
escape routes is of little value if they are all likely to
be disabled simultaneously.  Every escape route from
a storey should be independent of any other escape
route to which access may be obtained directly from
that storey.
This sub-section should be read in conjunction with
the general provisions for means of escape in
sub-section 1.4.
Number of Escape Routes and Exits
1.2.2
The number of escape routes and exits to be
provided from a room or storey depends on the
following factors:
Alternative escape routes should satisfy the following
criteria:
(a) they are in directions 45° or more apart
(Diagram 2 (a)); or
-
the number of occupants (see 1.2.2.1);
-
the limitations on travel distance (see 1.2.2.2 and
Table 1.2); and
(b) they are in directions less than 45° apart, but are
separated from each other by fire-resisting
construction (Diagram 2 (b)); or
-
the minimum number of escape routes required
(see 1.2.2.4 and Table 1.3);
(c) (from any point from which there is initially a
single direction of escape) they are in directions
apart equal to 45° plus 2.5° for every metre
travelled in one direction (Diagram 2 (c)).
1.2.2.1 Number of occupants - The figure used
for the number of occupants will normally be the
design figure.  When the number of occupants likely
to use a room or storey is not known, the
appropriate capacity should be calculated on the
basis of the occupant capacity.  Guidance is set out
in paragraph 1.0.10 of this Document and Table 1.1.
There may be cases where it may be reasonable to
depart from the stated occupancy load factors.
The number of occupants in a room or storey will
determine the width of escape routes and exits to be
provided (see 1.2.4).
23

Diagram 1     Travel distances
Par. 1.2.2.2
Protected stairway
Travel distance
Protected corridor
Storey exit
1.
ESCAPE IN ONE DIRECTION ONLY  (CORRIDOR)
Protected stairway
Travel distance
Storey exit
Protected lobby
2.
ESCAPE IN ONE DIRECTION ONLY (OPEN PLAN)
Protected
stairway
Travel distance
Storey exit
Storey exit
Protected
stairway
3.
ESCAPE IN MORE THAN ONE DIRECTION
24

Table 1.2
Limitations on Travel Distance
Purpose Group(s) (1)
Use of premises or part of  premises
Maximum travel distance(2) related 
to available direction of escape
In one 
In more than 
direction
one direction
2(a)
Residential (Institutional)
10
20
2(b)
Other Residential:
(a)
bedroom (3)
10
20
(b) bedroom corridor
10
35
(c)
elsewhere
20
35
5
Assembly and recreation
(a)
areas with seating in rows
15
32
(b) other areas
18
45
(c)
buildings primarily for use by disabled
persons
9
18
6
Industrial(4)
(a)
normal risk
25
45
(b) high risk
12
25
7(a)
Storage(4)
(a)
normal risk
18
45
(b) high risk
15
32
7(b)
Car Parks
18
45
8
Other Non-Residential
18
45
2 - 8
Places of special fire risk (5)
9
18
2 - 8
Plant-room or roof-top plant
(a)
within room(3)
9
35
(b) total travel (enclosed)
18
45
(c)
total travel (open air)
60
100
Notes:
(1)
Purpose Groups are defined in Table 0.1 to Section B0.
(2)
Where the internal arrangement of walls and fixed furniture is not known, direct distance may be used for assessment.  For
design purposes, the direct distance may be taken as 2⁄3rds. of the travel distance.  However, the final layout should not create
travel distances which exceed the tabulated values.
(3)
Denotes the maximum part of total travel which is within a room.
(4)
See Appendix E for assessment of risk in industrial and storage buildings.
(5)
Places of special fire risk are defined in par. 1.0.9.
25

Diagram 2
Alternative escape routes
Par. 1.2.2.3
A
45°
≥45°
Two directions of escape
assumed if angle indicated is
45º or more.
In shaded areas where the
angle will be less than 45º at
any point, one direction of
escape only should be
assumed and dead end
conditions will apply.
B
Exit
C
Exit
(a)
IN DIRECTIONS 45° OR MORE APART
B    To storey exit
KEY
Dead end condition
A
Less than 45°
D
DA 
not 
to 
exceed 
distance allowed for single
direction of travel.
C    To storey exit
(b)
IN DIRECTIONS LESS THAN 45° APART
B
Angle BAC = 45º + 2.5º for
every metre travelled from
D to A.
C
A
Note: DA not to exceed 
that allowed for single 
direction of travel.
Single escape route exists at
D.
D
(C)
INITIAL DEAD END CONDITION
26

1.2.2.4
Minimum number of escape routes -
The number of escape routes from any room or
storey should be not less than that indicated in Table
1.3, except where permitted by par. 1.2.2.5 to be
served by a single escape route.
Planning of Escape Routes and Exits
1.2.3
The basic principle of escape route planning
is that unless a route is very short, there should be
an alternative which will not be affected if fire or
smoke makes the first route impassable.
Table 1.3
Minimum number of escape routes
Every escape route should lead to a place of safety,
and should give direct access to that place of safety,
or give access thereto only by means of a circulation
area.
Number of persons 
Minimum number 
accommodated
of escape routes
1 to 500
2
1.2.3.1 Inner rooms - A room whose only escape
route is through another room is at risk if a fire
starts in that other room. It is termed an inner room
and is at risk from a fire in the outer room (access
room).
More than 500
3
1.2.2.5
Single escape route - In order to avoid
occupants being trapped by fire or smoke, there
should be alternative escape routes from all parts of
the building except for the situations listed below
where a single route can be acceptable:
Such an arrangement is only acceptable if the
following conditions are satisfied:
(a)
the inner room should not be likely to have
more than 20 occupants;
(a) areas, except in a building of purpose group 2(a),
Residential (Institutional), not likely to contain
more than 50 persons, near enough to an exit to
satisfy the limits on travel in one direction
indicated in Table 1.2;
(b)
the inner room should not be a bedroom;
(c)
the escape route from the inner room should
not pass through more than one outer (access)
room;
(b) rooms which are not likely to contain more  than
50 people, or 20 people if the building is in
Residential (Institutional) use, provided that the
limits on travel in one direction only are satisfied
(see Table 1.2); or
(d)
the travel distance from any point in the inner
room to the exit(s) from the access room
should not exceed the appropriate limit given in
Table 1.2;
(c) a storey, except in the case of a building of
purpose group 2(a), Residential (Institutional),
which is not likely to contain more than
50 people, where the limits on travel in one
direction only are satisfied (see Table 1.2).
(e)
the access room should not be a place of special
fire risk and it should be in the control of the
same occupier; and
(f)
one of the following arrangements are made -
In many cases the beginning of the escape route will
be in one direction only (i.e. a single escape route)
to a point where there are alternative escape routes.
This is acceptable provided that the total travel
distance to the nearest exit is within the limits for
routes where escape is possible in more than one
direction and the section with the single escape
route does not exceed the limit for escape in one
direction only (see Table 1.2 and Diagram 2(c)).
(i)
the enclosures (walls or partitions) of the
inner room are stopped at least 500 mm
below the ceiling, or
(ii)
a vision panel is located in the enclosure of
the inner room, of sufficient size, to enable
occupants of the inner room to see if a fire
has started in the outer room, or
(iii) the access room is fitted with a suitable
27

fire detection and alarm system to warn
the occupants of the inner room should an
outbreak of fire occur in the access room.
1.2.3.4 Access to storey exits - A storey which
should have more than one escape stairway should
be planned so that it is not necessary to pass
through one stairway to reach another.
1.2.3.2 Open connections between floors -
Routes and exits should not be prejudiced by open
connections between floors. Where travel is in one
direction only, it should not be within 5 m of an
open connection between floors unless it is leading
away from the opening. Where there is a choice of
routes, at least one of them should lead away from
the opening (see Diagram 3).
1.2.3.5 Separation of circulation routes from
stairways - An escape stairway should not form
part of the primary circulation route between
different parts of the building at the same level.  An
exception to this requirement may be made in the
case of a building, having not more than three
storeys (see Appendix C, Diagram 36), which is
served by a single escape stairway (see 1.3.3) where
rooms open directly into the enclosure to the
stairway and where self-closing fire doors are
unlikely to be rendered ineffective as a result of
constant use.
1.2.3.3
Planning of exits in a central core -
Buildings with more than one exit in a central core
should be planned so that storey exits are remote
from one another, and so that no two exits are
approached from the same lift hall, common lobby or
undivided corridor, or linked by any of these (see
Diagram 4).
Diagram 3
Exit routes in relation to openings between floors
Par. 1.2.3.2
Storey exit
C
Opening
B
E
Storey exit
D
<45˚
F
5 m min.
A
PLAN
Storey exit
SECTION  - (with smoke spreading between floors via opening)
NOTES
1.
Where the exit route is not away from the opening there should be a choice of routes, as at A, C or F.
2.
Point F does not have alternative escape routes.  Single escape route should not be less than 5 m from any open connection between floors.
3.
Routes should not all lead towards an opening.
28

Diagram 4
Central core arrangement
Par. 1.2.3.3
Accommodation
Lift
Protected stairway
Lift
FD 30S
Washrooms,
services etc.
FD 30S
Lift
Protected stairway
Lift
Accommodation
NOTE:    Possible alternative position of fire doors shown dotted.
1.2.3.6
Storeys divided into different
occupancies - Where any storey is divided into
separate occupancies (i.e. where there are separate
ownerships or tenancies of different organisations):
(c) a fire detection and alarm system, complying with
the requirements for at least an L3 type system
as defined in I.S. 3218: 1989, should be provided
throughout the storey (see 1.4.14).
(a) the means of escape from each occupancy should
in general not pass through any other occupancy;
Width of Escape Routes and Exits
(b) the common corridor serving the different
occupancies should be a protected corridor (see
1.2.5.1); and
1.2.4
The width of escape routes and exits
depends on the number of persons needing to use
them, and should not be less than the dimensions
given in Table 1.4.
29

any room should be adequate for the appropriate
evacuation procedures, taking into account the
physical capacity and dependency of the occupants
and should not be less than 900 mm.
Table 1.4
Width of escape routes and exits
Maximum number of 
Minimum width (mm)
persons
(1)(2)(3)
50
750(4)
100
850
150
950
220
1050
More than 220,
5mm per person(5)
Special provisions, which include the width of
seatways and gangways, apply to areas with closely
seated audiences (see 1.2.8).
1.2.5
Corridors
Notes: 
(1) Refer to Para B1.0.10 (c) Methods of Measurement -
Width.
(2) The minimum widths given in the table may need to
be increased in accordance with the guidance in TGD
M: Access for People with Disabilities.
(3) Widths less than 1050 mm should not be
interpolated.
(4) May be reduced to 530 mm for gangways between
fixed storage racking other than in public areas of
buildings of purpose group 6 or 7.
(5) 5 mm/person does not apply to an opening serving
less than 220 persons.
1.2.5.1 Protected corridors - A corridor which
serves as part of the means of escape in any of the
following circumstances should be a protected
corridor (see Table A1, Appendix A):
(a) every corridor serving sleeping accommodation
within Residential (Institutional) or other
Residential buildings (Purpose Groups 2(a) or
2(b));
(b) every dead-end corridor;
There is a possibility that one escape route may
become unavailable due to a fire in a building.
Except where permitted to be served by a single
escape route (see 1.2.2.5), or where all the exits
from an area open directly to the open air at ground
floor level, it will be necessary to take account of
this when calculating the total capacity of available
escape routes.  It is therefore necessary to consider
the effect of discounting each escape route in turn.
(c) any corridor common to two or more different
occupancies (see also par. 1.2.3.6).
1.2.5.2
Enclosure of corridors that are not
protected corridors - The enclosures to all
corridors used as means of escape (which are not
protected corridors) should be carried up to the
underside of the structural floor above (or to a
suspended ceiling) and all openings in the corridor
enclosures should be fitted with doors.
The total capacity of the escape routes and exits
from any room or storey should be adequate for the
number of occupants, taking account of discounting,
where required.  The total capacity should be based
on the sum of the capacities of each individual escape
route or exit, based on the values indicated in Table
1.4, with an allowance for discounting where
applicable.
1.2.5.3
Sub-division of corridors - If a corridor
provides access to alternative escape routes, there is
a risk that smoke will spread along it and make both
routes impassable before all occupants have escaped.
To avoid this, every corridor connecting two or
more storey exits where the distance between
storey exits exceeds 12 m should be sub-divided by
self-closing fire doors (and any necessary associated
screens) so that:
In assembly and recreation buildings (purpose Group
5), the escape route provided by the main entrance
to the building should be capable of discharging at
least one third of the occupant capacity in
accordance with the provisions of Table 1.4.
(a) no length of undivided corridor is common to
two storey exits; and
In Residential (Institutional) buildings (Purpose
Group 2(a)) an escape route should generally be not
less than 1150 mm in width and where appropriate,
be suitably designed to allow the movement of beds
along the escape route.  The width of an exit from
(b) the fire door(s) are positioned to effectively
safeguard the route from smoke, having regard
to the layout of the corridor and to any adjacent
fire risks.
30

1.2.5.4 Separation of dead-ends - If a dead-end
portion of a corridor provides access to a point
from which alternative escape routes are available,
there is a risk that smoke from a fire could make
both routes impassable before the occupants in the
dead-end have escaped. To avoid this, unless the
escape stairway(s) and corridors are protected by a
pressurization system complying with BS 5588: Part
4: 1978; every dead end corridor exceeding 4.5 m in
length should be separated by self-closing fire doors
(together with any necessary associated screens)
from any part of the corridor which:
(a) the route does not serve a Residential
(Institutional) building, or a part of a building
intended for use by members of the public;
(b) the roof is part of the same building from which
escape is being made, or if it is part of another
building, there is a legal agreement between the
parties concerned which includes a right of entry
into that building;
(c) the route across the roof leads to a storey exit;
(d) the part of the roof forming the escape route
and its supporting structure, together with any
opening within 3 m of the escape route, is fire-
resisting; and
(a) provides two directions of escape (Diagram
5(a)); or
(b) continues past one storey exit to another
(Diagram 5(b)).
(e) the route is adequately defined and guarded by
walls and/or protective barriers which meet the
provisions in Technical Guidance Document K.
1.2.6
External Escape Routes
In the case of any existing building, an escape route
by way of a flat roof which complies with (b) to (e)
above may be acceptable as an alternative means of
escape, where combined with an external escape
stairway as outlined at 1.2.6.1 above.  Where the
building is used for assembly and recreation the
numbers of persons likely to use such an escape
route should not exceed 150.
1.2.6.1 External escape stairway - If more than
one escape route is required from a storey, or part
of a building, one of those routes may be by way of
an external escape stairway provided that:
(a) in the case of an assembly and recreation
building, the route is not intended for use by
members of the public; or
The provisions of this paragraph do not prohibit an
escape route by way of an external podium which
gives direct access to a place of safety and where the
roof is constructed of non-combustible construction
having a fire resistance of at least 60 minutes.
(b) in the case of a Residential (Institutional) building,
the route serves only office or residential staff
accommodation.
In the case of an existing building, the use of an
external escape stairway as an alternative means of
escape may be acceptable, where there is no
practicable alternative solution.  Where the building
is used for assembly and recreation, the number of
persons likely to use the stairway should not exceed
150.
External escape stairways should comply with the
requirements set out in par. 1.3.9.
1.2.6.2  Escape over flat roofs - If more than one
escape route is required from a storey, or part of a
building, one of those routes may be by way of a flat
roof, provided that:
31

Diagram 5
Dead end corridors
Par. 1.2.5.4
To storey exit
To storey exit
Protected corridor
(a) T - JUNCTION WITH MAIN CORRIDOR
Protected corridor
Protected corridor
To storey exit
To storey exit
Protected stairway
Protected stairway
(b) CONTINUATION PAST ESCAPE STAIRWAYS
KEY
30 minutes fire resisting construction
Fire door (FD 30S)
32

1.2.7 Evacuation Considerations
(a) Adjoining compartments into which horizontal
evacuation may take place should each have a
floor area sufficient to accommodate not only
their own occupants but the occupants from the
adjoining compartment. This should be calculated
on the basis of the design occupancy of the
compartments.
1.2.7.1 General - In premises of Purpose Group
2(a), Residential (Institutional), occupants may be
totally dependant on other people for evacuation.
Normal "self-help" evacuation procedures are
therefore inappropriate and consideration must be
given to designing escape routes to facilitate the
planned mode of evacuation. The following
provisions should be made to allow progressive
horizontal escape to be made into adjoining
compartments in those parts of buildings used to
accommodate occupants of this type. The object is
to provide a place of relative safety within a short
distance, from which further evacuation can be made
if necessary but under less pressure of time.
(b) Each compartment should have at least one
other escape route, independent of the route
into the adjoining compartment (see Diagram 6).
This other route may be by way of a third
compartment, provided that compartment
contains a storey exit which is not by way of
another compartment, and which is independent
from the exits from the other compartments.
1.2.7.2 Compartmentation - Every storey used
for occupants of the type described in 1.2.7.1 above
should be divided into at least two compartments in
such a way as to permit horizontal evacuation of
each compartment.
Where the above conditions have been met, for the
purpose of travel distance (see 1.2.2.2), a door in a
compartment wall may be regarded as being
equivalent to a storey exit.
1.2.7.3 Planning for progressive horizontal
evacuation - In planning a storey which is divided
into compartments for progressive horizontal
evacuation, the following conditions should be
observed:
Diagram 6
Progressive horizontal evacuation
Par. 1.2.7.3
Compartment walls
Storey exit
Storey exit
FD*S
FD*S
Compartment
Compartment
Compartment
KEY
Travel distance
Travel distance limits apply to storey exits or exits to adjoining compartment (see 1.2.2.2 for 
appropriate limits).
FD*S
Fire Door
See Table B1 to Appendix B.
33

1.2.8
Closely-Seated Audiences
There are particular problems that arise when
people are limited in their ability to escape by fixed
seating.  Any such arrangements made for a closely
seated audience (or seated spectators) should meet
the provisions set out in Section 3, Sub-Section 8, to
BS 5588: Part 6: 1991.
1.2.9
Premises provided with a Stage
Stage areas present particular problems in that they
present additional fire risk from the presence of
combustible materials.  Where stage areas occur
they should comply with the provisions for these
areas set out in Section 5, Sub-Section 13, to BS
5588: Part 6: 1991.
34

1.3
Design for Vertical Escape
-
the stairway is separated from each occupancy
by protected lobbies (see 1.3.8) at all levels;  and
1.3.1
Introduction
-
an automatic fire detection and alarm system is
provided throughout the building (see 1.4.14).
An important aspect of means of escape in multi-
storey buildings is the availability of a sufficient
number of adequately-sized and protected escape
stairways. This Section deals with these matters,
including measures necessary to protect escape
stairways, for all types of building other than those
covered by codes of practice or other documents
which are referred to in sub-section 1.1.
In a building with more than four storeys above
ground or access level, a stairway serving a flat or
maisonette should not communicate with other non-
residential occupancies unless:
-
the flat or maisonette is ancillary to the main use
of the building;
It should be read in conjunction with the general
provisions for means of escape in sub-section 1.4.
-
the stairway is separated from each occupancy
by protected lobbies (see 1.3.8) at all levels;
1.3.2
Number of Escape Stairways
-
an independent alternative escape route is
provided from the flat or maisonette;  and
1.3.2.1 The number of escape stairways needed in a
building (or part of a building) will be determined by:
-
an automatic fire detection and alarm system is
provided throughout the building (see 1.4.14).
(a) the constraints imposed in sub-section 1.2 on the
design of horizontal escape routes;
1.3.3
Single Escape Stairways
(b) whether independent stairways are required in
mixed occupancy buildings (see 1.3.2.3 below);
The situations where a building (or part of a building)
other than buildings of Purpose Group 2(a)
Residential (Institutional), may be served by a single
escape stairway are:
(c) whether a single stairway is acceptable (see par.
1.3.3); and
(a) if there is no storey with a floor level  in the case
of a Purpose Group 5 building more than 5 m
above ground level, or in other cases more than
10 m above ground level, and where (in
accordance with par. 1.2.2.5) every storey may
have a single escape route, or
(d) provision of adequate width for escape (see
paragraph 1.3.4).
1.3.2.2 In larger buildings, provisions for access for
the fire service may apply. Some escape stairways
may need to serve also as fire-fighting stairways. The
number of escape stairways may therefore be
affected by  the requirements of B5 (see 5.3).
(b) if there is a basement the floor of which is not
more than 3 m below ground level where (in
accordance with par. 1.2.2.5) every basement
storey may have a single escape route.
1.3.2.3 Where a building contains storeys, or parts
of storeys, in different purpose groups and if one of
those purpose groups is either assembly and
recreation or residential it should have means of
escape which are independent of any other purpose
group except for the conditions described below.
1.3.4
Width of Escape Stairways
The width of escape stairways should:
(a) be not less than the width(s) required for any
exit(s) affording access to them;
In a building with not more than four storeys above
ground or access level, a stairway may serve both
dwellings and non-residential occupancies where:
(b) conform with the minimum widths given in Table
1.5;
35

(c) not exceed 1400 mm if serving any storeys more
than 30 m above ground level; and
1.3.5
Calculation of Minimum Stairway
Width
(d) not narrow at any point on their way to a final
exit.
1.3.5.1 General - Every escape stairway should be
wide enough to accommodate the number of
persons needing to use it in an emergency. This will
depend on the number of stairways provided and
whether the escape strategy is based on the total or
phased evacuation of the building (or part of the
building).
If the width of the stairway is more than 1800 mm,
then for reasons of safety in use the stairway should
have a central handrail.  In such a case the stairway
width on each side of the handrail needs to be
considered separately for the purpose of assessing
stairway capacity.
Escape based on total evacuation should be used for:
Where an exit route from a stairway also forms the
escape route from the ground and/or basement
storeys, the width may need to be increased
accordingly.
(a) all stairs serving basements;
(b) all stairs serving buildings with open spatial
planning; and
In buildings of Purpose Group 2(a) Residential
(Institutional), any landing associated with a stairway
forming part of an escape route should be adequate
for the purposes of evacuation.  Where evacuation
of beds or mattresses by way of a stairway is likely
to be required, any landing associated with such a
stairway should have a width not less than 2800 mm
and a depth clear of obstructions not less than 1950
mm.
(c) all stairs serving Residential or Assembly and
recreation buildings.
Paragraph 1.3.5.3 deals with the concept of total
evacuation.  Table 1.6 assumes the total evacuation
of all storeys simultaneously.
Paragraph 1.3.5.4 deals with the concept of phased
evacuation, and sets out the special measures that
are necessary if a system of phased evacuation is
used.  Table 1.7 assumes the phased evacuation of
not more than two floors at a time, and should be
used for buildings over 30 m high, provided that the
building is not one that is identified in the previous
paragraph as needing to be designed on the basis of
total evacuation.
Table 1.5   
Minimum width of escape stairways
Situation
Maximum number 
Minimum width 
of persons(1)
(mm)(5)
1
In any building, and serving an area which can 
150
1000
accommodate more than 100 people.
220
1100
More than 220
5 mm per person(2)(3)
2
In a building of Purpose Group 2(a), Residential (Institutional), 
(unless it will be used only by staff).
1150 (4)
3
In a building of Purpose Group 5, Assembly and recreation, 
100
900
serving an area which can accommodate less than 100 people.
4
Any stairway not described above.
50
800
100
900
Notes:
(1)
Assessed as likely to use the stairway in a fire or emergency.
(2)
See 1.3.5.3 and Table 1.6 for capacity of stairways when designing for total evacuation of the building.
(3)
See 1.3.5.4 and Table 1.7 minimum aggregate width of stairways designed for phased evacuation.
(4)
Except in the case of an existing building.
(5)
The minimum widths given in the table may need to be increased in accordance with the guidance in TGD M: Access for People with Disabilities.
36

Buildings, other than those identified above as
needing to be designed on the basis of total
evacuation which are less than 30 m high may also be
designed on the basis of phased evacuation if the
provisions in par. 1.3.5.4 are met.
1.3.5.3 Total evacuation - In a building designed
for total evacuation, the escape stairways should
have the capacity to allow all floors to be evacuated
simultaneously.  Persons on the lower floors will
evacuate from the building quicker than those on the
upper floors and account is also taken of persons
within the stairways during the evacuation process.
1.3.5.2
Discounting of stairways - Whichever
method of evacuation is used, where two or more
stairways are provided it should be assumed that one
of them might not be available due to fire or smoke.
It is therefore necessary to discount each stairway in
turn in order to ensure that the capacity of the
remaining stairways is adequate for the number of
persons needing to escape.
Table 1.6 gives capacities, based on total evacuation,
for stairways of different widths (1000 mm to 1800
mm) and numbers of storeys served (1 to 10).
Table 1.6 has been derived from the formula:
P = 200w + 50(w - 0.3)(n - 1), where:
An exception to the provision to discount stairways
in turn is if every escape stairway is approached on
each storey through a protected lobby.  In such a
case the likelihood of a stairway not being available is
significantly reduced and it is not necessary to
discount a stairway. A protected lobby need not be
provided on the topmost storey for the exception to
apply.  Another exception is if the stairways are
protected by a suitable pressurization system. A
design method for pressurization of escape routes is
set out in BS EN 12101-6.  The discounting of one
stairway applies to a building fitted with a sprinkler
system, unless the stairways are lobbied or provided
with a pressurization system as described above.
P:
is the number of people that can be
accommodated;
w:
is the width of the stairway in
metres; and
n:
is the number of storeys served.
The formula above may be used as an alternative to
Table 1.6 or for more than 10 storeys.
The widths of stairways provided should also meet
the criteria indicated at 1.3.4 and take account of the
need, where required, to discount any one stairway
(see 1.3.5.2).
The exceptions listed above to the requirement for
discounting each stairway in turn should not be
applied to :
(i)
assembly and recreation (Purpose Group 5)
buildings;
(ii)
any building where, by virtue of the limits on
travel distance and/or numbers of occupants,
less than three stairways are required;
(iii) any building with a storey more than 20 m
above ground level.
As with the design of horizontal escape routes,
where the maximum number of people needing to
use the escape stairway is not known, the
appropriate capacity should be calculated on the
basis of the occupant capacity. Guidance is set out in
paragraph 1.0.10 and Table 1.1 of this Technical
Guidance Document.
37

Table 1.6
Capacities of stairways (Total Evacuation)
Number of
Maximum number of persons accommodated on one stair of width: (mm)
storeys served
1000 
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1
150
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
2
190
260
285
310
335
360
385
410
435
3
230
300
330
360
390
420
450
480
510
4
270
340
375
410
445
480
515
550
585
5
310
380
420
460
500
540
580
620
660
6
350
420
465
510
555
600
645
690
735
7
390
460
510
560
610
660
710
760
810
8
430
500
555
610
665
720
775
830
885
9
470
540
600
660
720
780
840
900
960
10
510
580
645
710
775
840
905
970
1035
Note:
The capacity of stairs serving more than 10 floors may be obtained by the formula at 1.3.5.3.
1.3.5.4 Phased evacuation - The concept of
phased evacuation is based on evacuating persons on
a sequential basis, commencing with those on the
storeys most affected by the fire in its initial stages.
That is the storey of fire origin and the one
immediately above. By designing on the basis of
phased evacuation, stairway widths less than those
needed for total evacuation are possible. However, a
package of compensatory features are needed. These
are set out below:
The minimum width of stairway designed on the
basis of phased evacuation is indicated in Table 1.7.
This table assumes a phased evacuation of not more
than two floors at a time.
The success of a system of phased evacuation
depends to a large extent on the satisfactory
functioning of the measures outlined above.
Arrangements for the proper maintenance of the
systems are necessary, as are arrangements for
proper management and training.  These matters are
not appropriate for control under Building
Regulations, but satisfactory arrangements may be
sought under other legislation relevant to the
occupancy.
(a)
the stairways should be approached through a
protected lobby or protected corridor at each
storey except a top storey consisting exclusively
of plant rooms;
(b)
every floor should be a compartment floor;
Table 1.7  
Minimum aggregate width of
stairways for phased evacuation
(c)
if the building has a storey with a floor over
30 m above ground level, the building should be
protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler
system meeting the relevant recommendations
of BS 5306 Fire extinguishing installations and
equipment on premises: Part 2: Specification for
sprinkler systems, i.e. the relevant occupancy
rating together with the additional requirements
for life safety.
Maximum number of 
Stairway width 
persons in any storey
(mm)
100
1000
120
1100
130
1200
140
1300
150
1400
160
1500
170
1600
180
1700
190
1800
(d)
the building should be fitted with an appropriate
fire detection and alarm system (see 1.4.14);
Notes:
1
As an alternative to using Table 1.7, where the maximum
number of persons in any storey exceeds 100 the minimum
width of a stairway may be calculated from -
((P x 10) - 100) mm, where P = the number of people on
the most heavily occupied floor.
2
See Table 1.5 for minimum width of escape stairways.
See 1.3.4 (c) if the stairway serves any storey more than
30 m above ground level.
(e)
an internal speech communication system, such
as a telephone or intercom system, should be
provided to permit conversation between a
control point at fire service access level, and a
fire warden on every storey.
38

1.3.6
Protection of Escape Stairways
1.3.6.5
Use of space within protected
stairways - A protected stairway needs to be
relatively free of potential sources of fire.
Consequently, items that may be incorporated in a
protected stairway are limited to the following:
1.3.6.1  General - Escape stairways need to have a
satisfactory standard of fire protection if they are to
fulfil their role as areas of relative safety during a fire
evacuation. Protection of escape stairways is
provided by enclosure of the stairway by fire-
resisting construction.  Certain situations (see 1.3.8)
require the additional protection provided by a
protected access lobby or corridor to the stairway.
(a) sanitary accommodation or washrooms are
permitted, provided that the accommodation is
not used as a cloakroom. A gas water heater or
sanitary incinerator may be installed in the
accommodation, but the accommodation should
not include any other gas appliance.
In certain situations such as from a gallery, an open
stairway may form part of an escape route
conforming with the constraints of sub-section 1.2,
but such a stairway may not be regarded as an
escape stairway of the type described above.
(b) a lift may be included in a protected stairway.
There are other provisions about lifts in Section
1.4.9.
Escape stairways should conform with the provisions
in pars. 1.3.6.2 to 1.3.6.6 below.
(c) if the protected stairway serves part of a building
that has access to at least one other escape
stairway, then a reception or enquiry area may
be included in the stairway at ground or access
level. The reception or enquiry area should not
be more than 10 m2 in area. Cupboards enclosed
with fire-resisting construction may also be
included in such a protected stairway.
1.3.6.2 Enclosure of escape stairways - Every
escape stairway, unless it is an external escape
stairway (see 1.3.9), should be situated within a fire-
resisting enclosure (i.e. it should be a protected
stairway).
There may be additional provisions if the stairway is
also a protected shaft (where it penetrates one or
more compartment floors, see Section B3) or if it is
a fire-fighting stairway (see Section B5).
1.3.6.6
Fire resistance and openings in
external walls of protected stairways - With
some configurations of external wall, a fire in one
part of a building could subject the external wall, of a
protected stairway to heat (for example, where the
two are adjacent at an internal angle in the facade as
shown in Diagram 7). If the external wall of the
protected stairway has little fire resistance, there is a
risk that this could prevent the safe use of the
stairway.
The performance requirements for the enclosure to
a protected stairway are indicated in Appendix A
(Tables A1 and A2).  The performance requirements
for doors to the enclosure are contained in
Appendix B (Table B1).
1.3.6.3 Exits from protected stairways - Every
protected stairway should discharge:
Where a protected stairway projects beyond, or is
recessed from, or is in an internal angle of, the
adjoining external wall of the building, then the
distance between any unprotected area in the
external enclosures to the building and any
unprotected area in the enclosure to the stairway
should be at least 1.8 m (see Diagram 7).
(a) directly to a final exit; or
(b) by way of a protected exit passageway to a final
exit.
1.3.6.4 Separation of adjoining stairways -
Where two protected stairways (or exit
passageways leading to different final exits) are
adjacent, they should be separated by an imperforate
enclosure.
1.3.6.7
Gas service pipes in protected
stairways - Pipes intended to carry gaseous or
liquid fuels and associated equipment should not be
incorporated within a protected stairway.
39

1.3.6.8 Separation of special fire risk areas -
Escape stairways require a high degree of protection
from fire. Rooms or other accommodation which
have doors opening onto escape stairways can
threaten the escape routes from a building.  Places of
special fire risk (see 1.0.9) should therefore be
located so that they do not communicate directly
with the enclosure to a protected stairway.
1.3.7.2  If there is more than one escape stairway
from an upper storey of a building (or part of a
building), only one of the stairways serving the upper
storeys of the building (or part) need be terminated
at ground level. Other stairways may connect with
the basement storey(s) if they are separated at each
basement level by a protected lobby or protected
corridor.
1.3.7
Basement Stairways
1.3.8
Protected Lobbies and Corridors to
Escape Stairways
Because of their situation, basement stairways are
more likely to be filled with smoke and heat than are
stairways in ground and upper storeys. Special
measures are therefore needed in order to prevent
a basement fire causing a hazard to upper storeys.
These are set out in the paragraphs below.
1.3.8.1 Provision of protected lobbies and
corridors - In addition to stairways serving
basements (see 1.3.7), there are other situations
where an escape stairway requires the added
protection of a protected lobby or corridor.  These
are:
1.3.7.1 If an escape stairway forms part of the only
escape route from an upper storey of a building (or
part of a building) it should not be continued down
to serve any basement storey.  Any escape stairway
between a basement and the ground storey should
be separated by a protected lobby or protected
corridor from the stairway serving the upper
storeys.
(a) where the stairway is the only stairway serving a
building (or part of a building) which has three or
more storeys (see Appendix C, Diagram 36),
except in the case in a small guesthouse (see
1.3.8.2);
Diagram 7
External protection to protected stairway
Par. 1.3.6.6
Outside
Outside
1.8 m min.
1.8 m min.
1.8 m min.
1.8 m min.
1.8 m min.
Outside
PLAN 
PLAN
PLAN
KEY
Fire resisting construction  (see Tables A1 and A2 of Appendix A)
NOTE
The distance between any unprotected area in the external enclosure to the building, and any unprotected area in the
enclosure to the protected stairway, should be at least 1.8 m.
40

(b) where the stairway serves any storey at a height
greater than 20 m (see Appendix C, Diagram 38);
provision of compensating features (see 1.0.11.2 and
1.0.11.3).  The nature and extent of the additional
measures required will depend on the circumstances
of each particular case.
(c) where the building is designed for phased
evacuation (see 1.3.5.4);
Where protected lobbies or corridors can not be
provided, it will be necessary to consider the
following items in the context of the need to ensure
a satisfactory level of protection to the means of
escape:
(d) between a protected stairway and a place of
special fire risk (see 1.0.9);
(e) in a sprinklered building in which the stairway
width has not been based on discounting one
stairway (see 1.3.5.2); or
-
the nature and extent of the occupancies and
accommodation adjoining the protected stairway;
(f) in a building serving flats and maisonettes and
other non-residential occupancy (see 1.3.2.3).
-
the fire performance of the stairway enclosure;
in the above mentioned situations, access to the
protected stairway should be by way of protected
lobbies or protected corridors at all storey levels,
except at the top-most level.
-
the performance of fire door assemblies as
installed in the building (see Appendix B);
-
smoke control measures to protect the stairway
enclosure; and
1.3.8.2 Small guesthouses (Purpose Group
2(b)) - An exception to the requirement for a
protected lobby or corridor to the stairway in a
building served by a single escape stairway may be
made in the case of a guesthouse (Purpose Group
2(b)), where the following conditions are met:
-
life safety protection to be provided by the fire
detection and alarm system (see 1.4.14).
1.3.8.4 Requirements for protected lobbies
and corridors - Every protected lobby or corridor
which is required to be provided should comply with
the following:-
(i)
the house does not contain a basement and
there are not more than three storeys (see
Diagram 36);
(i)
be constructed with walls having fire resistance
as required in Section B3 for the protecting
structure of the stairway, as per Table A1 Item
11 and any door to the lobby should be a self-
closing fire door having a fire resistance not less
than half that required for the wall, but not less
than 30 minutes;
(ii)
there are not more than four bedrooms on
any upper storey;
(iii)
the stairway is a protected stairway (see
1.3.6.2);
(iv)
a fire detection and alarm system is provided
in accordance with the requirements of par.
1.4.14; and
(ii)
be constructed so that the clearance between
the edges of the doors when fully open is not
less than 500 mm, and the distance between the
doors in the closed position is not less than 1
m, or when the distance between any two
doors in the closed position is less than 1 m,
the planes of such doors are at an angle to one
another of not less than 90 degrees; and
(v)
all habitable rooms are provided with windows
which can be used for escape or rescue (see
1.5.6).
1.3.8.3 Existing buildings - In the case of some
existing buildings, the provision of protected lobbies
or corridors to an existing escape stairway may not
be practicable.  In these situations, it would be
appropriate to consider alternative solutions and the
(iii) in the case of a protected lobby or corridor at
basement level, be ventilated by means of
permanent openings to the open air having an
area not less than 0.05 m2, or where the
41

protected lobby or corridor provides access at
any storey level to an enclosed car park or area
of special fire risk, be ventilated by means of
permanent openings to the open air having an
area not less than 0.4 m2.  Where the lobby or
corridor is not adjacent to an external wall of
the building, any connecting ventilation duct-
work should be protected by fire-resisting
construction.
Note: Unprotected openings are not permitted in
those parts identified above.  Any doors should be
fire-resisting and windows should be fire-resisting
and fixed shut.
The construction of external escape stairways should
comply with the requirements outlined in 1.4.4.
Diagram 8 shows two examples of unprotected
external escape stairways.
1.3.9
External Escape Stairways
In limited situations (see 1.2.6) external stairways are
acceptable as forming part of an escape route. It is
important that the external stairway is sufficiently
protected from the weather and is adequately
protected from a fire in the building. The following
conditions should be met:
(a) unless the stairway is of limited height, it should
be protected from the effects of snow and ice.
The degree of protection required will depend
on the location of the stairway and the
protection that might be afforded to the stairway
by the building itself.  Weather protection is not
required if the stairway serves a floor or storey
which is not more than 6 m above the external
ground level.
(b) all doors affording access to the stairway should
be fire-resisting, except that a fire-resisting door
is not required at the head of any stairway
leading downwards and where there is only one
exit from the building onto the top landing;
(c) any part of the external walls identified below
should be of fire-resisting construction -
(i) within 1.8 m of, and 9 m vertically below, the
flights and landings of a stairway leading
downwards; and
(ii) within 1.8 m of, and vertically above, the
flights and landings of a stairway leading
upwards; and
(iii) within 3 m of the escape route from the foot
of the stairway at ground level to a place of
safety.
42

Diagram 8
External escape stairways
Par. 1.3.9
No fire resistance required
30 min. fire resistance
1.8 m
Fire door
(FD 30)
6 m maximum
Fire door
(FD 30)
1.8 m
ELEVATION
3.0 m
EXAMPLE A
1.8 m
No fire resistance 
required for this door
Fire door
(FD 30)
6 m maximum
6 m maximum
1.8 m
3.0 m
ELEVATION 1
ELEVATION 2
3.0 m
KEY
Zone of fire
resisting
construction
1.8 m
Escape route
PLAN
EXAMPLE B
43

1.4 General Provisions for
Means of Escape
All doors that need to be fire-resisting to meet the
provisions in this Document should have the
appropriate performance given in Table B1 of
Appendix B.  They should also meet any limitations
on the use of glass (see par. 1.4.2.3).
Introduction
1.4.1
This sub-section deals with a number of
provisions about the construction and protection of
escape routes generally, and about some services
installations and other matters associated with the
design of escape routes. It applies to all buildings
other than Purpose Groups 1(a) and 1(b) - dwelling
houses.
1.4.2.3 Fire resistance of glazed elements -
Where glazed elements in fire-resisting enclosures
and doors are only able to satisfy the relevant
performance in terms of integrity, the use of glass is
limited. These limitations are set out in Appendix A,
Table A4.
Where the relevant performance can be met in
terms of both integrity and insulation, there is no
restriction in this Section on the use or amount of
glass, but there may be some restriction under
Section B5.
It should therefore be read in conjunction with
sub-sections 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 of this Document.
1.4.2 Protection of Escape Routes
1.4.2.1 Fire resistance of enclosures - Details of
fire resistance test criteria, and standards of
performance, are set out in Appendix A to this
Document.
1.4.2.4 Protection of escape stairways - The
protection of escape stairways should be in
accordance with the provisions outlined at 1.3.6,
unless the stairway is an unprotected stairway
forming part of an escape route in accordance with
the provisions of any Code of Practice or other
Document referred to in sub-section 1.1 appropriate
to the particular use.
All walls, partitions and other enclosures that need
to be fire-resisting to meet the provisions in this
Document should have the appropriate performance
given in Tables A1 and A2 of Appendix A.  They
should also meet any limitations on the use of glass
(see par. 1.4.2.3).
1.4.3 Doors on Escape Routes
1.4.2.2 Fire resistance of doors - Details of fire
resistance test criteria, and standards of
performance for fire doors, are set out in Appendix
B to this Document.
1.4.3.1 The time taken to negotiate a closed door
can be critical in an escape situation. Doors on
escape routes (both within and from the building)
should therefore be readily openable if undue delay
is to be avoided. Accordingly the provisions in the
paragraphs below should be met.
Note: Any reference to a fire door in this Technical
Guidance Document, or in any code of practice or
other document referred to in this Technical
Guidance Document, is intended to mean a
complete door assembly which includes the door
leaf or leaves, the door frame, ironmongery (hinges,
latches, closers, etc.) and any seals where required
between the frame and leaf or between leaves, and
which is installed in a building and is capable of
meeting the required performance.  The
performance of a fire door will critically depend on
the correct installation of the complete door
assembly.
1.4.3.2 Door fastenings - In general, doors on
escape routes, whether or not the doors are fire
doors, should either not be fitted with lock, latch or
bolt fastenings, or they should only be fitted with
simple fastenings that can be readily operated in the
direction of escape without the use of a key.
Where security on final exit doors is an important
consideration, such as some assembly or commercial
uses, panic bolts should be used to secure doors.
Where additional security is required when the
premises is not in use, hardware which is fully
removable should be used.  The following
recommendations apply to buildings, or parts of
44

buildings which are used for assembly or recreation
(Purpose Group 5):-
consider the provision of doors which are held in
the open position.  It should not be possible for such
doors to be released and closed when the building is
in use.
(a) Exit doors from areas holding more than 50
people should either be free from fastenings or
be fitted with panic bolts complying with I.S. EN
1125 1997.
1.4.3.4 Amount of opening and effect on
associated escape routes - All doors on escape
routes should be hung to open not less than 90°, and
with a swing that is clear of any change of floor level,
other than a threshold on the line of the doorway,
and does not reduce the required width of any
escape route across a landing.
(b) Doors, other than those covered by item (a),
should be fitted only with simple fastenings that
can be operated from the escape side of the
door without the use of a key.
Attention is drawn to the provisions of the Fire
Safety in Places of Assembly (Ease of Escape),
Regulations, 1985 (S.I. No. 249 of 1985).
Similarly, where it is necessary to recess a door that
is opening towards a corridor, then the depth of
recess should be sufficient that the door swing does
not reduce the required width of the corridor.
Information about door closing and hold open
devices for fire doors is given in Appendix B.
1.4.3.5 Vision panels - These are needed where
doors on escape routes subdivide corridors, or
where the doors are hung to swing both ways.
1.4.3.3 Direction of opening - Doors on escape
routes should be hung so that they open in the
direction of escape. In the case of small rooms or
buildings, this may not be practical or indeed
necessary, but in the following situations doors on
escape routes must always be hung to open in the
direction of escape:
1.4.3.6 Revolving and automatic doors -
Revolving doors, automatic doors and turnstiles can
obstruct the passage of persons escaping.  These
types of doors should not be provided across escape
routes unless:
(a) from a place of special fire risk, or
(i)
they are automatic doors complying with BS
7036:  and either:
(b) in the case of premises comprising an industrial,
storage or assembly and recreation use if more
than 20 people are expected to use them, or
(a)
they are arranged to fail safely to
outward opening from any position of
opening; or
(c) in the case of any other premises if more than 50
people are expected to use them.
(b)
they are provided with a monitored fail
safe system for opening the doors if the
mains power supply fails; or
An exception to the requirement for outward
opening doors on escape routes may be made in the
case of class-rooms and other small rooms in
schools where the number of persons in such rooms
does not exceed 60.
(ii)
swing doors to the required width are
provided immediately adjacent.
Manual sliding doors may be permitted, in certain
limited circumstances only, such as doors from
rooms in industrial or storage buildings which are
occupied by not more than 10 persons and where
swing doors would be impracticable.
1.4.4
Construction of Escape Stairways
1.4.4.1 General - Every escape stairway and its
associated landings should be constructed of
materials of limited combustibility in the following
situations.
As an alternative to outward opening doors, in
certain limited situations, it may be appropriate to
(a) if it is the only stairway serving the building, or
45

part of the building, and the period of fire
resistance for the elements of structure (Tables
A1, A2 to Appendix A) is 60 minutes or more,
intended to serve members of the public, they
should meet the requirements for a type E
(public) stairway to that standard.
(b) if it is within a basement storey,
(b) In the case of fixed ladders, these should only be
intended for use by able-bodied adults, and in
circumstances where it is not practical to
provide a more satisfactory means of vertical
egress. Fixed ladders are acceptable within plant
rooms.
(c) if it serves any storey having a floor level more
than 18 m above ground or access level, or
(d) if it is an external stairway
(there are other provisions about external
escape stairways in par. 1.3.9).
In addition, fixed ladders should be constructed of
non-combustible materials.
In satisfying the above provision, combustible
materials may be added to the upper surface of these
stairways, except in the case of firefighting stairs.
Guidance on the design of Helical and Spiral
stairways and fixed ladders, from the aspect of safety
in use, is given in Technical Guidance Document K.
An exception to the requirement for escape
stairways to be constructed of materials of limited
combustibility may be made in the case of an existing
internal stairway in any existing building where:
1.4.5 Height of Escape Routes
All escape routes should have a minimum clear
headroom of not less than 2 m and there should be
no projection below this height, except for any door
frame, which would impede the free flow of persons
using them.
-
the width of the stairway and dimensions of
steps are adequate for the purposes of means of
escape, and
-
the stairway is of sound construction and is
capable of affording safe passage for the users of
the building.
1.4.6 Floors of Escape Routes
The floors of all escape routes (including steps, ramps
and landings) should have non-slippery even surfaces.
There are other provisions dealing with the
construction of fire fighting stairways in Section B5.
Where a ramp forms part of an escape route, it
should not be steeper than 1 in 12 if it is shorter than
9 m, otherwise it should not be steeper than 1 in 20.
Escape stairways should comply with the
requirements of Section 1 of Technical Guidance
Document K - Stairways, Ladders, Ramps and
Guards, to the Building Regulations, 1997.  An
exception to this requirement may be made in the
case of an existing stairway in an existing building
which is capable of affording safe passage for the
users of the building.
Any sloping floor or tier should be constructed with
a pitch of not more than 35° to the horizontal.
Further guidance on the design of ramps and
associated landings, from the aspect of safety in use,
is given in Technical Guidance Documents K and M.
1.4.4.2
Helical, spiral stairways and fixed
ladders - Helical and spiral stairways and fixed
ladders may form part of an escape route subject to
the following restrictions:
1.4.7 Final Exits
Final exits need to be dimensioned and sited so that
they facilitate the evacuation of persons out of the
building, and away from the building. Accordingly,
they should be not less in width than the escape
route(s) they serve and also meet the following
provisions in the paragraphs below.
(a) Helical and Spiral stairways should comply with
the recommendations of BS 5395 Stairs, ladders
and walkways: Part 2 Code of Practice for the
design of helical and spiral stairs.  If they are
46

Final exits should be sited to ensure rapid dispersal
of persons from the vicinity of the building so that
they are no longer in danger from fire and smoke.
Direct access to a street, passageway, walkway or
open space should be available. The route clear of
the building should be well defined, and suitably
guarded if necessary, in situations where the exit
discharges other than to an open street or open
space at street level.
fire fighting equipment, where provided, can be
readily located.
Note: Emergency escape lighting may also be
required for the purpose of the Safety, Health and
Welfare at Work Act, 2005 to enable work activities
to be safely terminated and allow other emergency
actions to be effectively carried out.  Additional
emergency escape lighting may also be required
under the Fire Services Act, 1981 when the building
is in use.  The provisions outlined in this Section may
need to be supplemented accordingly.
Final exits also need to be apparent to persons who
may need to use them. This is particularly important
where the exit opens off a stairway that continues
down, or up, beyond the level of the final exit.
1.4.8.4 Emergency escape lighting should be
provided in accordance with the provisions indicated
in Table 1.8.  For the purpose of this table the
emergency escape lighting may consist of the
following parts:
Final exits also need to be sited so that they are
clear of any risk from fire or smoke in a basement,
or from openings to transformer chambers, boiler
rooms and similar risks.
(i)
un-defined escape routes: open areas in a
building where the escape routes are not fixed
or defined by the elements of construction;
1.4.8 Lighting of Escape Routes
1.4.8.1
The safe movement of persons along escape
routes, towards and through the exits to a place of
safety, depends on the illumination of those routes and
the ability to see hazards and changes of level and
direction.  Adequate artificial lighting should be provided
to all internal and external escape routes, except in the
case where there is adequate natural lighting and the
building is used only during daylight hours.
(ii)
defined escape routes: routes, such as exits,
escape corridors and escape stairways, through
which or along which, persons may be required
to travel to reach a final exit from a building;
(iii)
external escape routes: those parts of an
escape route outside a building from a final
exit, which may be required for persons to
reach a place of safety.
1.4.8.2 In the event of failure of the normal lighting,
emergency escape lighting is required.  Emergency
escape lighting is required to ensure that lighting is
provided promptly, automatically and for a suitable
duration when the normal lighting fails.  Emergency
escape lighting is required on complete failure of the
power supplies to the normal lighting in the building
and also on a localised failure of the normal lighting.
1.4.8.5 Emergency escape lighting should be
designed and installed in accordance with the
relevant recommendations in I.S. 3217: 1989 Code
of practice for emergency lighting.
1.4.9 Lifts
1.4.8.3 Emergency escape lighting should be
provided:
1.4.9.1 Evacuation lifts - In general it is not
appropriate to use lifts when there is a fire in the
building because there is always the danger of the lift
becoming immobilised as a result of the fire, and of
persons being trapped inside. However, in some
circumstances a lift may be needed as part of a
management plan for evacuating people with
disabilities. In such cases the lift installation needs to
be appropriately sited and protected, and needs to
contain a number of safety features that are intended
to ensure that the lift may remain usable for
evacuation purposes during the fire.
(a) to indicate clearly and unambiguously the escape
routes so that the means of escape can be safely
and effectively used;
(b) to provide illumination along such routes to
allow safe movement towards and through the
exits provided;
(c) to ensure that fire alarm call points and first-aid
47

Table 1.8
Provision of emergency escape lighting
Use of building or part of building
Purpose Group(1)
Parts requiring emergency escape lighting
Flats
1(c)
Defined escape routes, other than within dwellings.
Residential (Institutional)
2(a)
Defined escape routes, wards, treatment rooms, communal 
rooms, bathrooms and toilet areas, kitchens, other habitable 
rooms over 30 m2 in area.
Other residential
2(b)
Defined escape routes, dormitories, common rooms, 
kitchens, other habitable rooms over 30 m2 in area.
Offices
3
Defined escape routes.
Shops
4(a)
Defined and un-defined escape routes.(2)
Shopping Centre
4(b)
Defined and un-defined escape routes within individual shop 
units and in mall and concourse areas.
Assembly and recreation
5
Defined and un-defined escape routes.(3)
Industrial
6
Defined escape routes.
Storage
7
Defined escape routes.
Other non-residential
8
Defined escape routes, common areas, habitable rooms over 
30 m2 in area.
Any use other than dwelling houses
1(c), 2 to 8
Emergency generator room, switch room, plant room, 
battery room for emergency lighting system.
Any use other than dwelling houses
1(c), 2 to 8
External escape routes as required.(4)
Notes:
(1) as defined in Table 0.1
(2) except a shop at ground floor with a sales area less than 100 m2 and maximum travel distance of 15 m to a final exit to a public area.
(3) except in accommodation open on one side, with naturally lit escape routes, to view sport or entertainment during normal daylight
hours; and except toilet accommodation having a floor area of not more than 8 m2.
(4) except where there is sufficient external lighting from a public or other independent power supply.
Guidance on the necessary measures is given in BS
5588: Part 8 : 1988.
construction if they are sited such as to prejudice
the means of escape. A lift well connecting different
compartments should form a protected shaft (see
Section B3, 3.2).
1.4.9.2 Fire protection of lift installations
generally - Because lifts by their nature connect
floors, there is the possibility that they may prejudice
escape routes. To safeguard against this, the
following provisions in the paragraphs below should
be met.
Lifts should be approached only by way of a
protected lobby (or protected corridor) in
basements, or in any storey that contains high fire
risk areas and where the lift also delivers directly
into corridors serving sleeping accommodation.
Examples of high fire risk areas in this context are
kitchens, lounges and stores.  In buildings with any
storey at a height greater than 20 m, lifts should be
approached by way of a protected lobby (see 1.3.8).
Lifts, which rise within a large volume such as a mall
or atrium, and do not have a conventional lift-well,
may be at risk if they run through a smoke reservoir.
In these cases care is needed to maintain the
integrity of any smoke reservoir, and protect the
occupants of the lift.
A lift should not be continued down to serve any
basement storey if it is in a building (or part of a
building) served by only one escape stairway, or
within the enclosures to an escape stairway which is
terminated at ground level.
Lift wells should be either contained within the
enclosures of a protected stairway, or be enclosed
throughout their height with fire-resisting
48

Sub-section 1.3 sets out restrictions on escape
stairways that connect basements with the upper
storeys of a building.
1.4.11.2
Mechanical ventilation and air
conditioning systems - Any system of mechanical
ventilation should be designed to ensure that in a fire
the air movement is directed away from protected
escape routes and exits. In the case of a system
which recirculates air, the system should meet the
relevant recommendation for recirculating
distribution systems in BS: 5588: Part 9 Code of
practice for ventilation and air-conditioning
ductwork in terms of its operation under fire
conditions.
Lift machine rooms should be sited over the lift well
whenever possible. If the lift well is within the
enclosures to a protected stairway being the only
stairway serving the building (or part of the building),
then the machine room should be located outside
the stairway if it cannot be sited above the lift well.
1.4.9.3 Lifts such as wall climber or feature lifts,
which rise within a large volume such as a mall or
atrium and do not have a conventional well may be a
risk if they run through a smoke reservoir.  In which
case care is needed to maintain the integrity of the
smoke reservoir and protect the occupants of the
lift.
Any system of mechanical ventilation in an assembly
and recreation building should also comply with the
relevant provisions below:
(a)
any such system serving the parts of the
premises to which the public are admitted
should be independent of the remainder of the
premises;
1.4.10  Electrical Installations and
Protected Circuits
(b)
if the premises is used for stage presentations,
any such system should be designed to ensure
that the air movement during performances is
directed from the auditorium towards the
stage;
The electrical installation, comprising wiring, sockets,
switches, fuse boards, distribution boards, circuit
breakers, etc., should be installed in accordance with
the National Rules for Electrical Installations
(ET 101) published by the Electro-Technical Council
of Ireland.
(c)
any such system above a stage provided with a
proscenium opening should be entirely
independent of the auditorium system.
Where an electrical transformer or substation room
and any associated main switch room are to be
provided in a building, they should be located on the
perimeter of the building with an external access
door.  The location on the perimeter including
external access to the relevant room to be discussed
with the electricity distribution system operator.
Where a pressurization system is installed, any
ventilation and air conditioning systems should be
compatible with it.
Guidance and additional recommendations in
relation to ventilation systems in Places of Assembly
are contained in Section 20 of BS 5588: Part 6: 1999.
There are situations, such as in the case of fire alarm
systems, emergency lighting or evacuation lifts,
where continued operation of certain electrical
components during a fire may be required.  In this
regard, the specific provisions of the appropriate
design standards indicated in this Technical Guidance
Document should be followed.
Guidance on the design and installation of mechanical
ventilation and air conditioning plant is given in BS
5720: 1979 Code of practice for mechanical
ventilation and air conditioning in buildings, and on
ventilation and air conditioning ductwork in BS 5588:
Part 9: 1989 Code of practice for ventilation and air
conditioning ductwork.
1.4.11  Ventilation Systems
1.4.12  Refuse Chutes and Storage
1.4.11.1
Natural ventilation - Guidance on
designing for natural ventilation is contained in BS
5925: 1991, Code of Practice for ventilation
principles and designing for natural ventilation.
(a)
Refuse storage chambers, refuse chutes and
refuse hoppers should be sited and constructed
in accordance with BS 5906: 1980.  Code of
49

practice for storage and on-site treatment of
solid waste from buildings.
at Work Act, 2005.  The shape, colours and
pictogram (to convey the appropriate safety
message) for the signs are prescribed in those
Regulations.  The relevant emergency escape and
fire-fighting equipment signs may be used for the
purposes of this Section (B1).  Other signs, which
may be required when the building is in use, are
outside the scope of the Building Regulations.
(b)
Refuse chutes and rooms provided for the
storage of refuse should:
(i)
be separated from other parts of the
building with fire-resisting construction
(refer to Section B3), and
1.4.14 Fire Detection and Alarm Systems
(ii)
not be located within protected stairways
or protected  lobbies;
1.4.14.1 Introduction - The occurrence of fire in
a building could lead to a situation where conditions
become untenable and escape routes become
unusable.  It is likely that these conditions will not
occur until some time after the initiation of the fire
and the sooner the outbreak is detected, the more
time will be available for evacuation, should this be
necessary.
(c)
Rooms containing refuse chutes, or provided
for the storage of refuse, should be approached
only by way of a protected lobby provided with
not less than 0.2 m2 of permanent ventilation,
to the outside of the building.
(d)
Access to refuse storage chambers should not
be sited adjacent to escape routes or final exits
or near to windows of dwellings.
Buildings should be provided with a fire detection
and alarm system to warn the occupants of the
existence of fire where the building is of such a size,
layout or occupancy that the fire itself may not
provide adequate warning to the occupants so as to
enable them to escape safely.
1.4.13  Fire Safety Signs
Signs to indicate escape routes, including any
doorways or exits which provide access to the
means of escape, are required in all buildings, except
within dwellings.  They should be illuminated by
means of natural lighting, artificial lighting or by
emergency escape lighting, as appropriate (see 1.4.8),
so that they are clearly visible and distinguishable by
the occupants of a building.
Where a fire detection and alarm system is provided,
the 
system 
should 
comply 
with 
the
recommendations relevant to design and installation
contained in CEN TS 54: Part 14: 2004, Fire
detection and fire alarm systems - Guidelines for
planning, design, installation, commissioning, use and
maintenance (European) or I.S. 3218: 1989, Code of
practise for fire detection and alarm systems for
buildings – system design, installation and servicing.
The type of system provided should be appropriate
to the uses of the building and for protection of life
(types L and M systems). Guidance on the fire
detection and alarm systems for certain building
types is contained in the following paragraphs.
Signs should be provided to indicate the position of
fire-fighting equipment (see 1.4.16) and fire alarm call
points (see 1.4.14), where provided.
Signs, in accordance with BS 5499: Part 5: 2002,
should be provided on fire doors (see Appendix B),
except those held open by electromagnetic devices
connected to the fire alarm, to indicate that they
should be kept shut.
Attention is drawn to possible additional
requirements for fire safety signs under the Fire
Services Act, 1981, when the building is in use.
1.4.14.2
Residential (Institutional) buildings -
In most types of residential (institutional) buildings, a
high level of protection is required and a type L1 fire
detection and alarm system should generally be
provided. In the design of such systems,
consideration should also be given to the category of
occupant, evacuation procedures and means of
alerting the emergency services.
Attention is also drawn to Statutory Instrument, S.I.
No. 132 of 1995 Safety, Health and Welfare at Work
(Signs) Regulations, 1995.  These Regulations require
the provision of emergency and other signs in a place
of work, as defined in the Safety, Health and Welfare
50

Guidance on the provision of fire detection and
alarm systems in hospitals is contained in Firecode
Health Technical Memorandum 82 Alarm and
detection systems, 1996.
can be initiated.  Consideration could also be given,
particularly in large buildings, to a system which
initially warns the occupants in the areas of the
building most likely to be affected by the fire.
1.4.14.3 Mixed-user buildings - A fire detection
and alarm system should be provided in buildings
which contain a number of different occupancy types
or uses.  The type of system and the degree of
protection provided should be appropriate to the
nature of the occupancies and to the building size,
layout and construction.
1.4.14.5
Where an atrium is designed in
accordance with BS 5588 Part 7: 1997 Code of
practice for incorporation of atria in buildings, then
the relevant recommendations in that code for the
installation of fire detection/alarm systems for the
design options selected should be followed.
1.4.14.4
 Buildings
 containing
 flats
 or 
maisonettes  -  In  a  building  containing  flats,  or
 maisonettes,  Purpose
 Group  1(c),
 individual  
dwellings  (except  open  plan  flats)  should  be  
provided  with  a  fire detection  and  alarm  system  
complying with the provisions  set  out  in  1.5.5  of 
this  Document  (a maisonette  should  be  treated 
as a  two  storey dwelling house for this purpose).
1.4.15  Provisions for People with
Disabilities
Where access for people with disabilities is provided
to a building or part of a building in accordance with
Part M of the Second Schedule to the Building
Regulations, provision should also be made, in the
building or part of the building (as the case may be)
for appropriate means of escape for such people.
Open  plan  flats  should  be  provided  with  a  fire 
detection  and  alarm  system  complying  with  the 
provisions set out in 1.6.3(d) of this Document.
This  provision  also  applies  to  buildings  containing  
flats.
In addition to alarms within individual dwellings, in a 
building containing flats where the flats are accessed 
by  common  protected  corridors  /  lobbies / 
stairways,  a  common  fire  detection  and  alarm 
system should be provided. It should be designed to
 provide adequate warning in the case of fire.
The principles underlying the design of the means of
escape from a building are based on the assumption
that in the event of an outbreak of fire it may be
necessary to evacuate all or part of a building.
Normally the evacuation will be to a place of safety
outside the building, but in some cases it may be
necessary to initially evacuate to a place of relative
safety within the building.  The management of
evacuation forms an important part of the fire safety
strategy for a building.  While there are no
provisions in the Building Regulations in relation to
fire safety management (see 0.1.7), the guidance in
this Document assumes that an adequate level of fire
safety management will be provided when the
building is in use.
This  system  should  not be  connected  to  any  
alarms  within  individual  dwellings  provided  in  
accordance with 1.5.5 or 1.6.3(d).
It should consist of:
(i) a heat detector in each flat, located adjacent to     
    the entrance door to the flat,
(ii) a sounder in each flat, meeting the requirements
     of EN 54-3, located in the circulation area, not  
     more than 5 m from any bedroom door,
(iii) smoke detectors and sounders in all common
In any building there may be people with disabilities
which impair their mobility or limit other faculties
such as sight and hearing.  The evacuation of such
people require special consideration.  In addition, it
may be necessary to consider any special
requirements in the provision of fire detection and
alarm systems (see 1.4.14).
escape routes, and
(iv) smoke or heat detectors (as appropriate) in    
      ancillary accommodation.
The system design should incorporate measures to
reduce the risk of false alarms or misuse and provide
for a means of control so that a pre-determined
response leading to the evacuation of the building
51

Guidance on the provision of means of escape for 
people  with  disabilities  is  contained  in  BS  5588: 
Part 8:1999  Fire  precautions  in  the  design  and 
construction  of  buildings,  Part  8,  Code  of  
practice  for  means  of  escape  for  disabled  people. 
The principles outlined in BS 5588: Part 8: 1999 are 
based on the provision of refuge areas and the
management of evacuation. Refuge areas are areas
within a building, separated by fire-resisting
construction  and  provided  with  a  safe  route  to  a 
storey  exit,  where  people  with  disabilities  can 
await assistance for their evacuation.
A hose reel consists of a length of tubing fitted with
a shut-off nozzle and attached to a reel, with a
permanent connection to a pressurized water
supply.  Hose-reels conforming to I.S. EN 671: Part
1: 1995 should be provided in a building, where the
floor area exceeds 500 m2, which is used as a shop
(purpose group 4(a)), a shopping centre (purpose
group 4(b)), industrial (purpose group 6) or for
storage (purpose group 7(a), 7(b)).  The installation
of hose reels should comply with the relevant
recommendations in BS 5306: Part 1: 1976 Fire
extinguishing installations and equipment on
premises, Part 1 Hydrant systems, hose reels and
foam inlets.
Refuge areas may be within the enclosure of an
escape stairway, within a protected lobby or
corridor leading to an escape stairway or in a
compartmented part of a storey (see 3.2) which
contains an escape stairway. A lift may be used for 
evacuation where it meets the criteria outlined 
insection 10 of BS 5588: Part 8.
1.4.17  Heat Producing Appliances
Heating boilers, cookers, fires for heating and other
appliances which burn liquid, gaseous or solid fuel
can provide a source of ignition for fires in buildings.
Refuge areas in buildings containing flats should be 
provided  in  a  place  of  relative  safety,  within  the 
enclosure  of  a  common  protected  stairway,  or 
within any protected corridor / lobby, adjacent to 
the  stairway.  This  protected  corridor  /  lobby  
should not  provide  direct  access  to  a  flat  or  to  
ancillary accommodation and should provide direct 
access to the stairway.
In this regard, critical items include:
-
the location of appliances in relation to escape
routes;
-
the provision of suitable and adequate flues,
chimneys and hearths as appropriate;
-
the provision of suitable and adequate
ventilation;
Part M of the Second Schedule to the Building
Regulations provides for access to buildings for
people with disabilities.  Technical Guidance
Document M provides guidance on compliance with
the requirements of Part M.
-
the provision and storage of fuel supplies.
Part J of the Second Schedule to the Building
Regulations contains requirements in relation to
heat producing appliances.  Technical Guidance
Document J - Heat producing appliances, provides
guidance on how to comply with Part J of the
Regulations.
1.4.16  First-Aid Fire-Fighting Equipment
First-aid fire fighting equipment is provided in
buildings to be used by the occupants, with
appropriate training and where it is safe to do so, in
the early stages in the development of a fire.  This
equipment may be a fixed installation, such as a hose
reel or may be portable fire extinguishers.  Portable
fire extinguishers are excluded from the provisions
of the building regulations but may be required when
the building is in use for the purpose of the Fire
Services Acts, 1981 and 2003 and the Safety, Health
and Welfare at Work Act, 2005.
Some of the documents referred to in sub-section
1.1, contain guidance in relation to heat producing
appliances and building services generally.  The
measures may also relate to provisions appropriate
to Section B3, Internal Fire Spread (Structure).
52

1.5
Dwelling Houses
An open-plan arrangement, where the stairway rises
directly from the ground storey accommodation is
less preferable than the arrangement at (ii) above
and is only acceptable where:
Introduction
1.5.1
This section deals with the means of escape
provisions in Residential (Dwellings), dwelling houses
(Purpose Groups 1(a) and 1(b) in Table 0.1).
-
the stairway discharges to within 4.5 m of a door
at the ground storey leading directly to the open
air;
Note: the means of escape provisions for Residential
(Dwellings) flats and maisonettes (Purpose Group
1(c) in Table 0.1) are indicated in 1.1.2.
-
the stairway does not discharge into a kitchen
and either:
Dwelling houses will generally have a single escape
stairway and there is a risk that this may become
unusable due to smoke.  Protection/enclosure to the
stairway is required, to an extent which varies with
the number of storeys above the ground level.
Windows, if suitably located and constructed, can in
some situations provide an alternative means of
escape.  With increasing height, windows become
unsuitable for escape but may be useful for rescue
purposes.  Early warning of fire can be achieved by
the provision of an appropriate smoke detection and
alarm system.
•
any ground storey kitchen is enclosed in
storey height construction which need not
be fire resisting or;
•
where the stairway passes within 3 m of the
kitchen, the stairway should be enclosed in
storey-height construction which need not
be fire-resisting;
-
a fire detection and alarm system is provided, in
accordance with 1.5.5;
-
all habitable rooms at the upper storey are
provided with windows for escape or rescue in
accordance with 1.5.6; and
The means of escape provisions for dwelling houses
are outlined in 1.5.2 and 1.5.8.  1.5.7 deals with loft
conversions in existing dwelling houses and 1.5.8
contains general provisions for dwelling houses.
-
the design meets the general provisions for
dwelling houses, outlined in 1.5.8.
Dwelling Houses with no Floors more
than 4.5 m above ground level (Purpose
Group 1(a))
Dwelling Houses with one Floor more
than 4.5 m above ground level (Purpose
Group 1(b))
1.5.2
The following provisions apply to dwelling
houses where the height of the top storey is not
more than 4.5 m (see Appendix C, Diagram 38).
This type of dwelling house typically has one or two
storeys:
1.5.3
The following provisions apply to dwelling
houses where there is one storey which is at
a height of more than 4.5 m (see Appendix C,
Diagram 38).  This type of dwelling house will
typically have three storeys above ground level:
(i)
any habitable room which is an inner room
should be provided with a window for escape
or rescue in accordance with 1.5.6.
(i)
a habitable room should not be an inner room
unless
(ii)
a stairway serving an upper storey should be
enclosed with storey-height construction,
which need not be fire-resisting, and should
discharge directly to the open air;
-
it has a floor level not more than 4.5 m
above ground or access level; and
-
it is provided with a door or window for
escape or rescue which complies with the
provisions of par. 1.5.6;
(iii)
a fire detection and alarm system should be
provided, in accordance with 1.5.5; and
(iv)
the provisions in 1.5.8 should be complied
with.
53

(ii)
unless the top storey is separated from the
lower storey by fire-resisting construction
(refer to B3 and Appendix A) and is provided
with an alternative escape route leading to its
own final exit, the internal stairway should:
Dwelling Houses with more than one
Floor more than 4.5 m above ground level
(Purpose Group 1(b))
1.5.4
The following provisions apply to dwelling
houses where there are more than one storey at
a height of more than 4.5 m (see Appendix C,
Diagram 38).  This type of dwelling house will
typically have four or more storeys above ground
level:
-
be a protected stairway (see 1.4.2 and
Tables A1, A2);
-
connect the ground and all upper storeys;
and
(i)
a habitable room should not be an inner room
unless
-
either deliver directly to a final exit
(Diagram 9(a)) or give access to not less
than two independent escape routes
delivering to alternative final exits (see
Diagram 9(b));
-
it has a floor level not more than 4.5 m
above ground level and
-
it is provided with a door or window for
escape or rescue which complies with the
provisions of par. 1.5.6;
(iii) automatic smoke detection and alarms should
be provided in accordance with 1.5.5; and
(ii)
all upper floors should be served by a stairway
which should
(iv) the general provisions for dwelling houses,
outlined in par. 1.5.8  should be met.
Diagram 9
Alternative arrangements for escape via the ground storey in 
Par. 1.5.3
dwelling houses with floors more than 4.5 m above ground level
Final exit 1
Final exit
Final exit 2
(a) Protected stairway delivering
directly to the final exit.
(b) Protected stairway affording
access to two independent
escape routes
GROUND FLOOR PLANS
KEY
30 min. fire-resisting construction
Fire door (FD 20)
54

-
be a protected stairway (see 1.4.2 and
Tables A1, A2);
number of storeys and the fire risk.  BS 5839: Part 6:
2004 provides for different grades of systems as
follows:
-
connect the ground and all upper storeys;
and
Grade A systems incorporate control and indicating
equipment and are designed, installed and maintained
in accordance with BS 5839: Part 1: 2002, but with
some specific modified provisions.
-
either deliver directly to a final exit (see
Diagram 9(a)) or give access to not less
than two independent escape routes
delivering to alternative final exits (see
Diagram 9(b));
Grade B systems incorporates fire detectors, fire
alarm sounders and control and indicating equipment
as specified in BS 5839: Part 6: 2004.
(iii) an alternative escape route by way of an escape
stairway should be provided from each storey
which has a floor 7.5 m or more above the
ground or access level.  Where the access to
the alternative escape route is by way of the
protected stairway, the protected stairway at
or about 7.5 m above ground or access level
should be separated from the lower storeys or
levels by fire resisting construction;
Grade C systems incorporate fire detectors and
alarm sounders (which may be combined in the form
of smoke alarms) connected to a common power
supply with standby supply and an element of central
control.
Grade D systems are based on the provision of one
or more mains-powered smoke alarms each
provided with an integral standby power supply.
They may also incorporate one or more mains
powered heat alarms each with an integral standby
power supply.
(iv) automatic smoke detection and alarms should
be provided in accordance with par. 1.5.5; and
(v)
the general provisions for dwelling houses,
outlined in par. 1.5.8  should be met.
All smoke alarms and heat alarms should be
interconnected so that detection of fire by any one
unit provides an audible alarm from each.
Fire Detection and Alarm Systems for
Dwelling Houses
The grade of the system should be at least Grade D
as described above.  Guidance on the selection of
grades of system for other situations, where the fire
risk and size of the building so warrants, is contained
in BS 5839: Part 6: 2004.
1.5.5
A fire detection and alarm system can
significantly increase the level of fire safety in a
dwelling house and should be provided in
accordance with the following guidance.
Note: Grade E and F type systems, which are based
only on battery or mains-powered smoke and heat
alarms, are not acceptable for new dwelling houses.
BS 5839: Part 6: 2004, Fire detection and alarm
systems for buildings, Part 6: 2004 Code of practice
for the design and installation of fire detection and
alarm systems in dwellings, provides guidance on the
provision of fire detection and alarm systems in
dwellings. This standard refers to different grades
and types of fire detection and alarm systems, which
can provide varying levels of protection.  The grade
and system should be selected and installed in
accordance with the following paragraphs.
1.5.5.2 Fire detection and alarm system types
Dwelling houses should be provided with an LD1 or
an LD2 fire detection and alarm system in
accordance with BS 5839 Part 6: 2004 designed for
the protection of life.
An LD1 system incorporates suitably located and
interconnected detectors throughout the dwelling
house, including all circulation areas that form part of
the escape route and in all rooms and areas in which
1.5.5.1
Grades of fire detection and alarm
systems - The grade of alarm system should be
appropriate to the size of the dwelling house, the
55

a fire might start, other than toilets, bathrooms and
shower rooms.
Windows for Escape or Rescue
1.5.6
Windows may provide an alternative means
of escape or may be used for rescue purposes in
dwelling houses of limited height. As an alternative, a
door which gives direct access to a balcony or roof,
which is suitable for rescue by ladder or for escape
may be used. Where provision is made in this sub-
section for windows for these purposes (see
paragraphs 1.5.2, 1.5.3, 1.5.7.6 and 1.5.8.2), such
windows should comply with the following:
An LD2 system incorporates suitably located and
interconnected detectors in all circulation areas that
form part of the escape route and in all rooms or
areas, such as kitchens and living rooms, that present
a high fire risk.
Heat detectors should be provided in kitchens.
Dwelling houses with up to three storeys above
ground level should have at least an LD2 system.
Dwelling houses with more than three storeys, large
houses, or where the fire risk so warrants, should be
provided with LD1 systems as appropriate, which
will provide a higher level of life safety.  Guidance on
system types for different situations is contained in
BS 5839: Part 6: 2004.
(a) The window should have an openable section
which can provide an unobstructed clear open
area of at least 0.33 m2 with a minimum width
and height of 450 mm (the route through the
window may be at an angle rather than straight
through). The opening section should be capable
of remaining in the position which provides this
minimum clear open area.
1.5.5.3 Installation of smoke and heat alarms
- Two types of self-contained smoke alarm, an
optical type and an ionisation type, which have
differing smoke response characteristics, are
available.  A mixture of both types is recommended
and in the case of a typical two storey dwelling
house, an optical type on the ground floor storey
and an ionisation type on the upper floor is the most
appropriate.
(b) The bottom of the window opening should be
not more than 1100 mm and not less than 800
mm (600 mm in the case of a rooflight) above the
floor, immediately inside or beneath the window
or rooflight. As an exception to the general
guidance in TGD K (Stairways, Ladders, Ramps
and Guards) that guarding be provided for any
window, the cill of which is less than 800 mm in
height above floor level, guarding should not be
provided to a rooflight opening provided in
compliance with this paragraph.
The number and location of smoke alarms and heat
alarms will be determined by the system type (see
1.5.5.2).  In circulation areas, no door to a habitable
room should be further than 7.5 m from the nearest
smoke alarm.  The location of smoke alarms,
particularly in relation to doorways to bedrooms and
the spacing of units, should be such as to ensure that
the audibility requirements specified in BS 5839: Part
6: 2004 will be achieved.
(c) In the case of a dormer window or rooflight, the
distance from the eaves to the bottom of the
opening section of the rooflight, or, where the
window is vertical, the vertical plane of the
window, should not exceed 1.7 m measured
along the slope of the roof.
Smoke and heat alarms should preferably be fixed to
the ceiling, at least 300 mm from any wall or light
fitting.  The method of fixing and location/spacing
should take into account instructions provided by
the manufacturer of the alarms.
(d) The area beneath the window externally should
be such as to make escape or rescue practicable.
For example,
(i) where there is a clear drop from a window in
an upper storey or attic conversion, the
ground beneath the window should be
suitable for supporting a ladder safely and be
accessible for rescue by the fire services or
others.
It should be possible to reach all smoke and heat
alarms to carry out, easily and safely, routine
maintenance such as testing and cleaning.
Instructions on maintenance requirements should be
provided with all smoke alarm systems.
56

(ii) Where there is a roof, balcony or canopy
below a window, it should be structurally
adequate to support those using the window
for escape or rescue.
(b) give access to at least two escape routes at
ground level, each delivering to final exits and
separated from each other by fire-resisting
construction and self-closing fire doors (Diagram
9(b)).
(e) The opening section of the window should be
secured by means of fastenings which are readily
openable from the inside and should be fitted
with safety restrictors. Safety restrictors can be
either an integral part of the window operating
gear or separate items of hardware which can be
fitted to a window at the time of manufacture or
at installation. Restrictors should operate so that
they limit the initial movement of an opening
section to not more than 100 mm. Lockable
handles or restrictors, which can only be
released by removable keys or other tools,
should not be fitted to window opening sections.
1.5.7.2 New stairways - The new storey should be
served by a stairway meeting the provisions in
Technical Guidance Document K - (Stairways,
Ladders, Ramps and Guards).  The new stairway
should be contained within an enclosure which is
formed by extending the existing enclosure in fire
resisting construction so that the new
accommodation is separated from the existing
stairway.  Two alternative approaches are given in
(a) and (b) below:
(a) The new stairway may rise over the existing
stairway and within the same enclosure, in which
case the stairway should be separated from the
new room(s) by a self-closing fire door set in
fire-resisting construction.
Loft Conversions
1.5.7
In the case of an existing two storey dwelling
house to which a storey is to be added by
converting the existing roof space into habitable
accommodation, the following provisions (1.5.7.1 to
1.5.7.7 inclusive) can be applied as an alternative to
those in 1.5.3.  However, these alternative
provisions are not applicable if:
(b) The new stairway may alternatively rise from the
existing room, in which case the new stairway
should be separated from the existing room and
the rest of the dwelling house by fire-resisting
construction with a self-closing door at the top
or bottom of the new stairway.
(a) the conversion involves raising the roof-line
above the existing ridge, or
1.5.7.3
Doorways - All doorways within the
stairway enclosure should be fitted with a door,
which in the case of an existing door to a habitable
room or kitchen should be fitted with an appropriate
self-closing device.  Any new door to a habitable
room should be a self-closing fire door (see
Appendix B).
(b) the new second storey accommodation exceeds
50 m2 in area; or
(c) the new second storey is to contain more than
two habitable rooms.
1.5.7.4
Glazing - Any glazing in the enclosure to
the existing stairway, including glazing in doors
(whether or not they need to be fire doors), should
be fire-resisting.  There should be no openable
glazed sections or other ventilation openings in the
enclosure to the stairway.
In the case of an existing single storey dwelling house
to which a storey is to be added by converting the
existing roof space into habitable accommodation,
the converted dwelling house should comply with
the provisions of 1.5.2 above.
1.5.7.1 Enclosure of existing stairway - The
stairway in the ground and first storeys should be
enclosed with walls and/or partitions which are fire-
resisting, and the enclosure should either:
1.5.7.5
Fire Separation of new storey - The
new storey should be separated from the rest of the
house by fire-resisting construction (see B3, Section
3.1.6).  To maintain this separation, measures should
be taken to prevent smoke and fire in the stairway
from entering the new storey.
(a) extend to a final exit (Diagram 9(a)); or
57

1.5.7.6 Escape windows - The room (or rooms)
in the new storey should each have an openable
window or roof-light for escape or rescue purposes
which meets the relevant provisions in 1.5.6 above.
correctly installed in dwelling houses.  In this regard,
critical items include:
-
location of the appliance, particularly in relation
to escape routes;
1.5.7.7
Fire detection and alarm systems -
Automatic smoke detection and alarms should be
provided throughout the dwelling house in
accordance with 1.5.5 above.
-
suitable and adequate flues, chimneys, fireplaces
and hearths as appropriate;
-
suitable and adequate ventilation;
General Provisions for Dwelling Houses
-
fuel supplies.
1.5.8
The following general provisions apply to
dwelling houses.
Part J of the Second Schedule to the Building
Regulations contain requirements in relation to heat
producing appliances. Technical Guidance Document
J - (Heat Producing Appliances), provides guidance
on the above items and on how to comply with Part
J.
1.5.8.1 Inner rooms - An inner room is where the
access to that room is through another room.  A
habitable room should not be an inner room unless
it is located at basement, ground or first storey and
is provided with a window or door suitable for
escape or rescue in accordance with the provisions
of 1.5.6.
Where a ducted warm air heating system is provided
in a dwelling house, precautions should be taken to
ensure that it will not contribute to fire spread or
endanger the enclosure to any stairway.  BS 5588:
Part 1: 1990 (Section 6) contains appropriate
guidance on these measures.
1.5.8.2 Windows for escape or rescue -
Windows may provide an alternative means of
escape or may be used for rescue purposes in
dwelling houses. Guidance in relation to such
windows is given in Paragraph 1.5.6. There are
specific situations, e.g. as described in Paragraphs
1.5.2, 1.5.3 and 1.5.7.6, where windows in dwelling
houses should comply with the guidance given in
Paragraph 1.5.6 in this regard.
1.5.8.4 Electrical installations - The electrical
installation, comprising wiring, sockets, switches,
fuses, distribution board, circuit breakers, earthing,
etc., should comply with the National Rules for
Electrical Installations produced by the Electro-
Technical Council of Ireland.
As a general provision, in addition to the specific
situations referred to above, all bedrooms in
dwelling houses, other than bedrooms with doors
that give direct access to the outside at ground level,
should comply with the provisions outlined in
Paragraph 1.5.6.
1.5.8.5 Basements - Basements, where provided
in dwelling houses, should be separated from the
ground floor storey by means of fire-resisting
construction.  A stairway serving an upper storey
should not extend down to the basement storey.
Where windows are being replaced in existing
dwelling houses, it is recommended that bedroom
windows should meet, in as far as is practicable, the
provisions outlined at 1.5.6.  In the case of other
habitable rooms, opening sections should not be
reduced or altered to an extent that reduces their
potential for escape or rescue.
Any basement habitable room which is an inner
room or basement bedroom should be provided
with an alternative means of escape.
The fire detection and alarm system (see 1.5.5)
should be extended to include any basement areas.
1.5.8.3 Heat producing appliances - Heat
Producing appliances include cookers, boilers and
open fires which are designed to burn oil, gas or
solid fuel.  These appliances are a potential source of
ignition for fires and it is important that they are
58

1.6
Open Plan Flats
1.6.2  General  requirements.  Where  an 
open  plan  flat  is  provided,  each  door 
between  the  flat  and  a  protected  corridor /
 lobby,  or  an open balcony  /  deck  approach, 
should  have  a  fire  resistance  equal  to the
fire resistance  of  the  wall,  but  not  more  than
60 minutes, in accordance with Appendix B.
Introduction
1.6.1
This  section  provides  additional  guidance 
(see 1.1.2) for means of escape provisions for open 
plan  flats,  which  are  accessed  directly  from  a 
common  protected  corridor  /  lobby,  or  an  open 
balcony / deck approach.
1.6.3  Internal  Layouts.  The means of escape 
requirements  in  open  plan  flats  are  determined by 
the maximum travel distance within the flat. Where 
the  travel distance is less than or  equal to 9 m, the
provisions  of 1.1.2 apply.  Where the  maximum 
travel  distance  exceeds  9 m, and  where  the 
appropriate  alternate means  of escape  (see  1.1.2)
has not been provided, the following provisions apply
 (see Diagram 9A):
The provisions of 1.6.3 do not apply to small, single 
staircase  buildings  (see  1.1.2),  where  a  flat  is 
accessed  directly  from  the  stair,  which  relies 
upon the  internal  protected  entrance  hall  for  
lobby protection to the staircase enclosure.
(a) a sprinkler  system  in  accordance with Section   
    1.8 should be provided,
59

(b)   the flat should be situated on a single storey   
only,
The maximum travel distance in a protected corridor
 / lobby provided with a smoke control system (see 
1.7.2), irrespective of the topmost floor level, is 7.5 
m.
(c)
the travel distance from any point in the flat to
the final exit from the flat should not exceed 
20 m,
Where every flat to a protected corridor / lobby on 
the same storey is provided with a sprinkler system 
(see  1.8),  and  the  same  protected  corridor(s)  / 
lobby(s)  are  provided  with  a  smoke  control  
system,  the  travel distance  on  that  storey  can  be 
further extended up to a maximum of 15 m.
(d)   a Fire Detection and Alarm System should    
       be provided.  It  should  consist of                 
       interconnected self-contained mainspowered /
       battery backed Smoke / Heat Alarms (Grade 
       D), which should be  provided in the              
       following locations:
The  travel  distance  should  be  measured  from  the 
furthest  entrance  door  to  a  flat  to  the  protected 
stair, or lobby door. The lobby should provide direct
 access  to  the  stair  and  should  not  provide  direct 
access to a flat or ancillary accommodation.
(i) all circulation areas that form part of an  
    escape route within the dwelling,
(ii) all  high  fire  risk  areas/rooms  e.g.        
     kitchen, living rooms, utility rooms, and
(iii) all bedrooms, and
1.7.2  Smoke  Control  System  for  Protected 
Corridors / Lobbies
(e) the kitchen:
(i)  should
be enclosed in  storey  height 
construction,  which  need  not  be  fire
A smoke control system for a protected corridor / 
lobby is installed to facilitate escape in corridors / 
lobbies.  The  smoke  control  system  should  be 
designed to ventilate the protected corridor / lobby 
for  means  of  escape.  The  smoke  control  system 
should be activated by means of an appropriate fire 
detection and alarm system.
resisting, or
(ii) if not enclosed, the flat layout should be 
designed such that an occupant escaping 
the flat should not have to approach 
within 1.8 m of the main kitchen cooking 
appliance.
A  main  kitchen  cooking  appliance  is  a cooking 
apparatus  with  a  fixed
connection  to  the 
dwelling's  gas  or electric  energy  infrastructure (for
example, an oven and/or hob).
The smoke control system should consist of (a), (b), 
or (c), as follows:
(a) an automatic opening vent having a clear openable 
    area of not less than 1 m2 fitted at the top of the
    stairway enclosure, and an automatic opening         
    vent(s) (AOV)  from  the protected corridor /        
    lobby to the exterior of the building, which should
    be in accordance with the following:
1.7 Protected Corridors / Lobbies Serving 
all Flats
Introduction
(i)
it should have a minimum free area of 1.5 m2,
This  section  provides  additional  guidance  (see  
1.1.2)  for  protected  corridors  /  lobbies  which 
provide means of escape from flats.
(ii)
it should be fitted as close to the top of the   
            ceiling of the protected corridor / lobby as is 
            practicable, but be at least as high as the top  
            of the door connecting the protected            
            corridor / lobby to the stairwell or lobby.
1.7.1. Corridor / Lobby Travel Distances in 
Buildings with a Single Stairway
All common protected corridors / lobbies which have
direct access to a flat should be ventilated by means 
of a smoke control system.
Where  there  are  multiple  AOV’s  due  to  multiple 
corridors, the system should be designed to activate 
the  relevant  AOV  only.  The  AOV’s  from  the 
common protected corridors / lobbies on all other 
floors should remain closed.
An exception to this requirement is a building with a 
topmost floor  level  of  less  than  11 m.In such a
 building,  where  a  smoke  control  system  is  not 
provided, the maximum travel distance (see 1.1.2) is 
4.5 m.
60

(b) an automatic opening vent having a clear openable  
     area of not less than 1 m2 situated at the top of      
     the stairway enclosure, and an automatic opening   
     vent to a natural smoke shaft, which should be in   
     accordance with 1.7.3 below.
(vii) the ventilation openings from the common          
       protected lobby  or  corridor  to  the vent  shaft
       should achieve the same fire performance  as     
      the shaft, but not exceeding  60 minutes,
(viii)  no  services  other  than  those  relating  to  the  
       smoke  shaft  should  be  contained  within  the     
       smoke shaft,
(c) a mechanical smoke control system which has a      
     proven equivalent performance to (a) or (b) above.
(ix)  the  shaft  should  be  vertical  from  base  to 
      head but may have not more than 4 m at an        
      inclined angle not more than 30o from the           
      vertical plane,
In  a  building  with  a  floor  level  at  more  than  20 
m  above  ground  level,  the  provision  of  an 
adequate  smoke  control  system  to  a  protected  
corridor  /  lobby  may  be  sufficient to ventilate  
the firefighting lobby (see 5.3).
(x)  the design of the system should be such that, on
    activation of the fire detection and alarm     
    system, the  ventilator on the fire floor, the           
      ventilator at the top of the smoke shaft and the   
      1 m2  ventilatorat the  head  of  the  stairway    
      should all open simultaneously.
Where  any  smoke  control  system  is  powered  by 
electricity, the system should be capable of operating 
at all material times.
1.7.3  Natural  Smoke  Shafts in buildings 
containing Flats
Natural  Smoke  Shafts  in buildings containing 
flats should  be  closed  at  the  base.  Replacement  
air  is provided  from  the  automatic  opening  vent  
in  the stairwell  to  help  the  efficiency  of  the  
shaft system.
Where there are multiple shafts due to multiple corridors,
 the  system  should  be  designed  to  activate  the  relevant 
shaft  only. The ventilators from the common protected 
corridors  /  lobbies  on  all  other  floors,  and  unaffected 
corridors on the fire floor should remain closed.
Natural smoke  shafts  should  meet  the  following
1.8 Domestic Sprinkler Systems
specific recommendations:
(i) the  
smoke  shaft  should  have  a  minimum 
     cross-sectional  area  of  
1.5 m2  (minimum
     dimension 0.85 m in any direction),
Introduction
This  section  provides  guidance  in  relation  to
sprinkler systems in buildings containing flats.
(ii) the minimum ventilation area from the common     
    protected lobby or corridor into the shaft, and at 
    the opening at the head of the shaft, and at all 
    internal locations within the shaft (e.g. safety grilles) 
    should be at least 1 m2,
1.8.1 Where a sprinkler system is provided, it should  
be  in  accordance  with  BS  9251:2014,  or equivalent.
The  system  should have the following as minimum 
requirements:
(a)  a  minimum  duration  of  operation  of  30
     minutes,
(iii) the  top  of  the  protected  corridor  /  lobby  vent  
      should  be  located  as  close  to  the  ceiling  of
       the protected corridor / lobby as is practicable,    
       and should be at least as high as the top of the   
       door connecting the  protected  corridor  /  lobby
       to  the  stairwell  or lobby,
(b) a flow rate of 4 mm/min for single head        
     operation, or 2.8 mm/min through each        
     sprinkler operating simultaneously up to a     
     maximum of two sprinklers in a single area of
     operation,
(iv)  the  shaft  should  extend  a  minimum  length of
      2.5 m above the ceiling of the highest storey
(c)  a primary  and  an alternative  power  supply,
(d)  a duty and standby pump, and
(e)  an on-site water storage capacity, suitable    
      to meet the flow requirements and duration  
      of the system, but not less than 3 m3.
which is served by the shaft,
(v) the opening at roof level should be at least 0.5 m   
     above any surrounding structures within a
     horizontal distance of 2.0 m,
An  isolation  valve  should  be  provided  to  each 
individual flat. It should be located within the flat, 
near  to  the  main  entrance  door,  and  should  be 
readily accessible.
(vi)  the smoke  shaft  should  be  constructed  in   
       accordance with 3.2.7.1,
61

Section B2
Internal Fire Spread (Linings)
Internal fire spread 
B2
For the purpose of inhibiting the spread of fire within a building,
(linings).
the internal linings -
(a)
shall have either a rate of heat release or a rate of fire
growth and resistance to ignition which is reasonable in
the circumstances
(b)
shall offer adequate resistance to the spread of flame over their
surfaces
Performance
The requirement of B2 may be met as follows:
A) In relation to the European fire tests and
classification system, the requirement of B2 will be
met if the heat released from the internal linings is
restricted by making provision for them to have a
rate of fire growth and a resistance to ignition which
is reasonable in the circumstances or
B) The requirement of B2 may be met if the spread
of fire over the internal linings of the building is
restricted by making provision for them to have low
rates of surface spread of flame and in some cases to
have a low rate of heat release or a rate of fire
growth, so as to limit the contribution that the fabric
of the building makes to fire growth.
The extent to which this is necessary is dependent
on the location of the lining.
62

Contents
Page
2.0
Introduction to provisions
•
Fire spread and lining
materials
64
• Floors and stairways
•
Furniture and fittings
•
Other controls on lining 
properties
•
Classification of performance
•
Assessment of performance
•
Definitions
65
2.1
General provisions
67
2.2
Variations and special
provisions
•
Walls
67
• Fire-protecting suspended
ceilings
•
Fire-resisting ceilings
•
Special Applications
2.3
Thermoplastic materials
•
Windows
68
• Rooflights
•
Lighting diffusers
63

2.0
Introduction to Provisions
exposed in concealed spaces above fire-protecting
suspended ceilings, and in sub-section 3.4 for
enclosures to above-ground drainage system pipes.
In B4, there are provisions in sub-section 4.1
concerning the external surface of walls and in sub-
section 4.3 concerning the surface of rooflights in
connection with the performance of roof coverings.
Fire Spread and Lining Materials
2.0.1
The choice of materials for the lining of walls
and ceilings can significantly affect the spread of a
fire, and its rate of growth, even though they are not
likely to be the materials first ignited.  This is
particularly important in circulation spaces where
linings would offer the main vehicle for fire spread,
and where rapid spread would be most likely to
prevent occupants from escaping.
Classification of Performance
2.0.5
Appendix A describes the different classes of
performance for materials used as a wall or ceiling
lining and the appropriate methods of test, including
performance ratings for thermoplastic materials,
referred to as TP(a) rigid and TP(b).
Several properties of lining materials influence fire
spread. These include the ease of ignition and the
rate at which the lining material gives off heat when
burning. The guidance relating to the European fire
tests and classification provides for control of
internal fire spread through control of these
properties.
The National classifications used are based on tests
in BS 476: Parts 6 and 7. Tests in BS 2782 and BS
5438 are used for classification of thermoplastic
materials.
Floors and Stairways
The European classifications are described in I.S. EN
13501-1:2002, Fire classification of construction
products and building elements, Part 1- Classification
using data from reaction to fire tests. They are based
on a combination of four European test methods;
2.0.2
It is impractical to attempt to control the
materials used to cover floors and stairways through
Building Regulations, and no provisions are made in
this Document about them.  Attention is directed
however to the provisions of the "Code of Practice
for Fire Safety of Furnishings and Fittings in Places of
Assembly" published by the Department of the
Environment, Heritage and Local Government.
I.S. EN ISO 1182: 2002, Reaction to fire tests for
building products - Non combustibility test
I.S. EN ISO 1716: 2002, Reaction to fire tests for
building products - Determination of the gross
calorific value
Furniture and Fittings
I.S. EN 13823: 2002, Reaction to fire tests for
building products - Building products excluding
floorings exposed to the thermal attack by a single
burning item and
2.0.3
Furniture and fittings can have a major effect
on fire spread but it is impractical to attempt to
control them through Building Regulations and no
provisions are made in this Document about them.
Attention is directed however to the provisions of
the "Code of Practice for Fire Safety of Furnishings
and Fittings in Places of Assembly" and other guides
to fire safety in existing buildings published by the
Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local
Government.
BS EN ISO 11925-2: 2002, Reaction to fire tests for
building products, Part 2 - Ignitability when subjected
to direct impingement of flame.
For some building products, there is currently no
generally accepted guidance on the appropriate
procedure for testing and classification in accordance
with the European fire tests.  Until such time that
the appropriate European test and classification
methods for these building products are published,
classification may only be possible using existing
national test methods.
Other Controls on Linings Properties
2.0.4
There are provisions for the control of fire
growth in two other parts of this Document. In B3
there are provisions in sub-section 3.3 for surfaces
64

Table A6 of Appendix A gives typical performance
ratings which may be achieved by some generic
materials and products.
Definitions
2.0.7
The following definitions apply specifically to
B2.  Other terms applicable more widely throughout
the Document are given in Appendix D.
Assessment of Performance
2.0.6
Combustible linings can contribute
significantly to the spread of fire in a building and
their use should be restricted.  The fire performance
of lining materials is especially important in
circulation spaces and on escape routes.  An
assessment of the likely performance of lining
materials should take account of the following:
Cavity - Means any space enclosed by the elements
of a building (including a suspended ceiling) or
contained within an element other than a room,
cupboard, circulation space, protected shaft or the
space within a flue, chute, duct, pipe or conduit.
Ceiling - A part of a building which encloses and is
exposed overhead in a room or circulation space
(the soffit of a rooflight is included as part of its
surface, but not the frame).
-
the performance of the lining materials in
accordance with the criteria indicated in
paragraphs A7 to A19 of Appendix A,
Circulation space - A space (including a protected
stairway) mainly used as a means of access between
a room and an exit from the building or
compartment.
-
the extent and thickness of the lining materials,
-
the likely interaction between wall and ceiling
linings and between linings and any combustible
fittings or fixtures,
Class 0 - See Appendix A, paragraph A11.
-
the extent of voids behind the lining materials
and the existence of electrical services in such
voids.
Rooflight - Any domelight, lantern light, skylight or
other element intended to admit daylight through a
roof.
Care should be taken to ensure that any products
which are used to treat lining materials for the
purpose of inhibiting spread of flame are applied, and
maintained, strictly in accordance with the
specification applicable to the relevant test
certification supplied by the manufacturer of such
products.
Room - An enclosed space in a building that is not
an enclosed circulation space (thus the term includes
not only conventional rooms, but also cupboards
that are not fittings, and large spaces such as
warehouses and auditoria).
Surface treatment of linings is not, in general, a
suitable method of achieving class B - s3, d2
(European class) or Class 0 (National class)
performance (see A10 of Appendix A).  However, in
the case of existing lining materials, which satisfy the
assessment criteria indicated above, surface
treatment to achieve the required performance may
be considered.
Care should be taken to ensure that a build up of
combustible paints does not reduce the classification
of any wall or ceiling lining.
65

Thermoplastic material - See Appendix A, par.
A14.
Wall - (for the purpose of B2) includes:
(i)
the surface of glazing (except glazing in doors),
and
(ii)
any part of a ceiling which slopes at an angle of
70° or more to the horizontal.
but a wall excludes (for the purpose of B2):
(i)
doors and door frames;
(ii)
window frames and frames in which glazing is
fitted;
(iii) architraves, cover moulds, picture rails, skirtings
and similar narrow members; and
(iv) fireplace surrounds, mantle-shelves and fitted
furniture.
66

Provisions meeting the Requirement
2.1
General Provisions
In the case of a wall surface in a building of Purpose
Group 1, 2, or 5 the area of that part should not
exceed 5 m2 and should be separated from any other
such part by a distance of not less than 2 m; or
Subject to the variations and specific provisions
described in the paragraphs below, the surface linings
of walls and ceilings should meet the following
classifications -
In the case of a wall surface in a building of any other
Purpose Group, the area of that part shall not
exceed 15 m2 and should be separated from any
other such part by a distance of not less than 2 m.
(a)
Class D - s3, d2 (European class) or Class 3
(National class)  in bathrooms, toilets and
shower rooms.
Fire-protecting Suspended Ceilings
(b)
Class C - s3, d2 (European class) or Class 1
(National class) in other rooms (except those
listed at (e) and (f) below),
2.2.2
In addition to satisfying the general
provisions set out in 2.1, suspended ceilings that can
be accepted as contributing to the fire resistance of a
floor must also meet the criteria outlined in
paragraph A5 and Table A3 to Appendix A.
(c)
ClassC - s3, d2 (European class) or Class
1(National class) in circulation spaces within
dwellings,
Fire-resisting Ceilings
(d)
Class B - s3, d2 (European class) or Class 0
(National class) in other circulation spaces
(including the common areas of flats and
maisonettes),
2.2.3
The need for cavity barriers in concealed
floor or roof spaces, referred to in sub-section 3.3 of
B3, can be reduced by the use of a fire-resisting
ceiling below the cavity. Such a ceiling should comply
with the following:
(e)
Class B - s3, d2 (European class) or Class 0
(National class) in rooms exceeding 30 m2 in
Residential (Institutional) and assembly and
recreation buildings, and
(a) it should have at least 30 minute fire resistance;
(b)
it should be imperforate except for an opening
allowed under par. 3.3.5;
(f)
Class B - s3, d2 (European class) or Class 0
(National class) in places of special fire risk (see
1.0.9).
(c) it should extend throughout the building or
compartment;
2.2
Variations and Special
Provisions
(d)
it should not be demountable; and
Walls
(e)
it should have a Class B - s3, d2 (European
class) or Class 0 (National class) surface on the
soffit, and at least a Class C - s3, d2 (European
class) or Class 1 (National class) surface facing
the cavity.
2.2.1
Part of the surface of a wall in a room may
be of a class lower than specified in 2.1, (but not
lower than Class D - s3, d2 (European) or Class 3
(National)) if the area of that part (or, if there are
two or more such parts, the total area of those
parts) does not exceed, the lesser of the following -
Special Applications
2.2.4. Any flexible membrane covering a structure
should comply with the recommendations given in
Appendix A of BS 7157:1989 Method of test for
ignitability of fabrics used in the construction of large
tented structures.
(i) 
half the floor area of the room, or
(ii)
20 m2 (in the case of a building or compartment
of Purpose Group 1, 2 or 5) or 60 m2 (in any
other case); and
67

Guidance on the use of PTFE-based materials for
tension-membrane roofs and structures is given in a
BRE Report Fire Safety of PTFE-based materials used
in buildings (BR274, BRE 1994).
Rooflights
2.3.3
Rooflights to rooms and circulation spaces
(with the exception of protected stairways) may be
constructed of a thermoplastic material if:
2.3
Thermoplastic Materials
(a) the lower surface has a TP(a) (rigid) or TP(b)
classification (see paragraph A15, Appendix A)
2.3.1
Thermoplastic materials (see Appendix A,
paragraphs A15, A16) which cannot meet the
performance specified in paragraph 2.1 can be used
in windows, rooflights and lighting diffusers in ceilings
if they comply with the provisions of the following
paragraphs:
(b) the size and disposition of the rooflights accords
with the limitations in Table 2.1, Diagram 10 and
Table 4.5 to Section B4.
Lighting Diffusers
Note: No guidance is currently possible on the
performance requirements in the European fire tests
as there is no generally accepted test and
classification procedure.
2.3.4
Lighting diffusers are translucent or open-
structured elements that allow light to pass through.
They may be part of a luminaire or used below
rooflights or other sources of light.  The following
provisions apply only to lighting diffusers which form
part of a ceiling and are not concerned with diffusers
of light fittings which are attached to the soffit of, or
suspended beneath a ceiling
Windows
2.3.2
External windows to rooms (though not to
circulation spaces) may be glazed with thermoplastic
materials, if the material can be classified as a TP(a)
rigid product.
Thermoplastic lighting diffusers should not be used in
fire protecting or fire resisting ceilings, unless they
have been satisfactorily tested as part of the ceiling
system that is to be used to provide the appropriate
fire protection.
Internal glazing should meet the provisions in par. 2.1
above. Note that a wall does not include glazing in a
door.
Table 2.1
Limitations applied to thermoplastic lighting diffusers in suspended ceilings
and thermoplastic rooflights
Minimum 
Use of space 
Maximum area 
Max total area of diffuser 
Minimum 
classification 
below the diffusers 
of each diffuser 
panels and rooflights as 
distance between 
of lower 
or rooflight
panel or rooflight (1)
percentage of floor area  
diffuser panels 
surface
of the space in which 
or rooflights (1)
the ceiling is located
TP(a)
any except 
Rigid
protected stairway
No Limit
No Limit
No Limit
TP(b)
rooms
5 sq.m
50
3 m
circulation spaces 
except protected 
stairways
5 sq.m
15
3 m
Note:
1. Smaller panels can be grouped together provided that the overall size of the group and the space between one group and any others
satisfies the dimensions shown in Diagram 10.
68

Diagram 10
Layout restrictions on TP(b) thermoplastic 
Par. 2.3.3, Table 2.1 
lighting diffusers and rooflights
5 m maximum dimension of group
of lighting diffusers or rooflights
5 m maximum
3 m minimum
5 m maximum
5 m  is maximum area of diffuser
or rooflight in any one 5 m x 5 m
group
2
3 m minimum dimension between groups
of lighting diffusers or rooflights
KEY
Lighting diffuser or rooflight
Separated groups of lighting
diffusers or rooflights
NOTE
Upper and lower surfaces of suspended ceilings between thermoplastic lighting diffusers or rooflights 
to comply with the provisions outlined at 2.1.
Ceilings to rooms and circulation spaces (but not
protected stairways) may incorporate thermoplastic
lighting diffusers if the following provisions are
observed:-
(c) If the diffusers are of classification TP(b), they
should be limited in extent as indicated in Table
2.1 and Diagram 10.
Thermoplastic materials which have a lesser
performance than TP(b) should not be used for
lighting diffusers which form part of a ceiling.
(a) Wall and ceiling surfaces exposed within the
space above the suspended ceiling (other than
the upper surfaces of the thermoplastic panels)
should comply with the general provisions of par.
2.1, according to the type of space below the
suspended ceiling.
(b) If the diffusers are of classification TP(a) (rigid),
there are no restrictions on their extent.
69

Section B3
Internal Fire Spread (Structure)
Internal fire spread
B3
(1)
A building shall be so designed and constructed that, in the event of
(structure).
fire, its stability will be maintained for a reasonable period.
(2)
(a)
A wall common to two or more buildings shall be so designed 
and constructed that it offers adequate resistance to the 
spread of fire between those buildings.
(b)
A building shall be sub-divided with fire resisting construction
where this is necessary to inhibit the spread of fire within the
building.
(3)
A building shall be so designed and constructed that the unseen spread
of fire and smoke within concealed spaces in its structure or fabric is
inhibited where necessary.
(4)
For the purposes of sub-paragraph 2(a), a house in a terrace and a
semi-detached house are each to be treated as being a separate
building.
Performance
The requirements of B3 may be met:
(a) if the structural elements of the building are
capable of withstanding the effects of fire for an
appropriate period without loss of stability,
(b) if the building is sub-divided by elements of fire-
resisting construction into compartments,
(c) if any openings in fire separating elements are
suitably protected in order to maintain the fire
integrity of the element, and
(d) if any hidden voids in the construction are sealed
and subdivided to inhibit the unseen spread of
fire and products of combustion, in order to
reduce the risk of structural failure and the
spread of fire, in so far as they pose a threat to
the safety of people in and around the building.
The extent to which any of these measures are
necessary is dependent on the use of the building
and, in some cases its size, and on the location of the
element of construction.
70

Contents
Page
Page
3.0 Introduction to
provisions
•
Fire resistance
72
• Provisions elsewhere in
3.4
Protection of openings and 
fire-stopping
•
Introduction
96
• Openings for pipes
Technical Guidance Document B 
concerning fire resistance
•
Material alteration
•
Definitions
•
Ventilating ducts
•
Flues, etc
•
Fire-stopping
3.1
Loadbearing elements of structure
3.5
Special provisions
•
Introduction
100
•
Car parks
•
Shopping centres
101
•
Residential (Institutional) buildings    102
•
Buildings containing an atrium
•
Introduction
74
• Fire resistance standard
•
Application of the resistance
standards for loadbearing elements
•
Exclusions from the provisions
for elements of structure
•
Additional provisions
•
Floors in domestic loft conversions
•
Raised storage areas
75
3.2
Compartmentation
•
Introduction
76
• Forms of compartmentation
•
Junctions and protected shafts
•
Provision of compartment walls
and compartment floors
•
Construction of compartment
floors and compartment walls
81
• Openings between compartments
85
• Protected shafts
3.3
Concealed spaces (cavities)
• Introduction
88
• Provision of cavity barriers
• Maximum dimensions of concealed
spaces
93
• Construction and fixings for
cavity barriers
94
•
Openings in cavity barriers
95
71

3.0
Introduction to Provisions
Appendix A gives information on methods of test
and performance for elements of construction.
3.0.1
Provisions for loadbearing elements of
structure are given in sub-section 3.1. Sub-section
3.2 is concerned with the subdivision of a building
into compartments, and sub-section 3.3 makes
provisions about concealed spaces (or cavities).
Sub-section 3.4 gives information on the protection
of openings and on fire-stopping which relates to
compartmentation and to fire spread in concealed
spaces. Sub-section 3.5 is concerned with special
provisions which apply to certain types of buildings.
Common to all these sub-sections and to other
provisions of this Document is the property of fire
resistance.
Appendix B gives information on fire-resisting doors.
Material Alteration
3.0.4
In the case of a material alteration of a
building and where a material change of use of the
building is not also involved, the provisions in
relation to the fire resistance for loadbearing
elements of Structure (See 3.1) contained in any
Guide or Code of Practice, published by the
Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local
Government for the purpose of section 18(2) of the
Fire Services Act, 1981, for the type of premises to
which the material alteration is carried out, may be
used as an alternative to the relevant provisions of
this Technical Guidance Document.
Fire Resistance
3.0.2
The fire resistance of an element of
construction is a measure of its ability to withstand
the effects of fire in one or more ways:
Definitions
-
resistance to collapse, i.e. the ability to maintain
loadbearing capacity (which applies to
loadbearing members only);
3.0.5
The following definitions apply specifically to
Section B3. Other terms applicable more widely
throughout this Document are given in Appendix D.
-
resistance to fire penetration, i.e. an ability to
maintain the integrity of the element (which
applies to fire-separating elements);
Appliance ventilation duct - A duct provided to
convey combustion air to a gas appliance.
Cavity barrier - A construction provided to close a
concealed space against penetration of smoke or
flame, or provided to restrict the movement of
smoke or flame within such a space.
-
resistance to the transfer of excessive heat, i.e.
an ability to provide insulation from high
temperatures (which applies to fire-separating
elements).
Concealed space (cavity) - A space enclosed by
elements of a building (including a suspended ceiling)
or contained within an element, but not a room,
cupboard, circulation space, protected shaft or space
within a flue, chute, duct, pipe or conduit.
Provisions Elsewhere in Technical
Guidance Document B concerning Fire
Resistance
3.0.3
There are provisions in Section B1
concerning the use of fire-resisting construction to
protect means of escape.
Compartment - A building or part of a building,
comprising one or more rooms, spaces or storeys,
constructed to prevent the spread of fire to or from
another part of the same building, or an adjoining
building.
There are provisions in Section B4 for fire resistance
of external walls to restrict the spread of fire
between buildings.
Compartment wall or floor - A fire-resisting wall
or floor used in the separation of one fire
compartment from another.
There are provisions in Section B5 for fire resistance
in the construction of fire-fighting shafts.
72

Fire stop - A seal provided to close an imperfection
of fit or design tolerance between elements or
components, to restrict or prevent the passage of
fire and smoke.
Pipe - Includes: pipe fittings and accessories;
excludes: a flue pipe and a pipe used for ventilating
purposes (other than a ventilating pipe for an above
ground drainage system).
Platform floor (access or raised floor) - A floor
supported by a structural floor, but with an
intervening concealed space which is intended to
house services.
Separating wall - A compartment wall used to
separate one building from another, which is the full
height of the buildings and is in a continuous vertical
plane.
73

Provisions meeting the Requirement
3.1
Loadbearing Elements of
Structure
provisions about fire resistance of elements of
structure in single storey buildings are also given, and
there are concessions in respect of fire resistance of
elements of structure in basements where at least
one side of the basement is open at ground level.
See "Application of the fire resistance standard in
Table A2" in Appendix A.
Introduction
3.1.1
Premature failure of the structure can be
prevented by provision for loadbearing elements of
structure to have a minimum standard of fire
resistance, in terms of resistance to collapse or
failure of loadbearing capacity.
Exclusions from the Provisions for
Elements of Structure
The purpose in providing the structure with fire
resistance is threefold:
3.1.4
The following are excluded from the
definition of elements of structure for the purposes
of these provisions:
-
to protect the occupants, some of whom may
have to remain in the building for some time
while evacuation proceeds, if the building is a
large one;
(a) a structure that only supports a roof, unless the
roof performs the function of a floor, e.g. for
parking vehicles, or as a means of escape (see
B1) or is essential for the stability of an external
wall which is required to have fire resistance (see
B4);
-
to protect fire fighters who may be engaged in
search or rescue operations (though this is
limited and is not intended to cover fire-fighting
operations generally);
(b) the lowest floor of the building; and
-
to reduce the danger to people in the vicinity of
the building who might be hurt by falling debris
or by the impact of the collapsing structure on
other buildings.
(c) a platform floor.
Additional Provisions
3.1.5
Additional provisions are required if a
loadbearing wall is also -
Fire Resistance Standard
(a) a compartment wall (see 3.2);
3.1.2
Structural frames, beams, columns,
loadbearing walls (internal and external), floor
structures and gallery structures, should have at least
the fire resistance given in Appendix A, Table A1.
(b) a wall between a house and a small garage (see
3.2, par. 3.2.4.2);
Application of the Fire Resistance
Standards for Loadbearing Elements
(see Appendix A, Tables A1 and A2)
(c) protecting a means of escape (see B1, par. 1.4.2);
(d) an external wall (see B4, sub-section 4.1 and 4.2);
(e) enclosing a firefighting shaft (see B5, sub-section
5.3).
3.1.3
The measures set out in Appendix A include
provisions to ensure that where one element of
structure supports or gives stability to another
element of structure, the supporting element has no
less fire resistance than the other element.
If a floor is also a compartment floor, see
sub-section 3.2.
Floors in Domestic Loft Conversions
The measures also provide for elements of structure
that are common to more than one building or
compartment, to be constructed to the standard of
the greater of the relevant provisions.  Special
3.1.6
In altering an existing two storey single
dwelling house to provide additional storeys, the
74

floor(s), both old and new, should have the full 30
minute standard of fire resistance shown in
Appendix A, Table A1. However, where only one
new storey not exceeding 50 m2 in area and
containing one or two habitable rooms is added in
the roof space of a two storey dwelling house, it
would be reasonable to provide the existing first
floor with a modified 30 minute standard of fire
resistance where:
(c) the layout is such that any persons on the floor
would be readily aware of any fire starting at the
lower level; and
(d) at least one stairway serving the raised floors,
platform or tier discharges within 3 m of an exit
from the building.
Features of layout or design that would allow
occupants to be aware of a fire starting at the lower
level include the use of perforations in the floor of
the structure, or leaving a space between the edge of
the platform and the walls of the room housing it, to
make the smoke and the sounds of the fire obvious.
If the floor is more than 10 m in width or length, an
automatic fire detection and alarm system should be
used to provide sufficiently early warning.
(a) the floor only separates rooms; and
(b) the provisions in 1.5.7 of Section B1 are met.
‘Modified 30 minute’ standard satisfies the test
criteria for the full 30 minutes in respect of
loadbearing capacity, but allows reduced
performances for integrity and insulation (see Table
A1, item 3(a)).
Raised Storage Areas
3.1.7
Raised floors (which may be supported by
racking) are frequently erected in single storey
industrial or storage buildings. Whether the
structure is considered as a gallery or is of sufficient
size that it is considered as a floor forming an
additional storey, the provisions for fire resistance of
elements of structure set out in Appendix A, Table
A1, would apply to the structure.
In the case of automated storage systems in which
people do not normally go onto any of the raised
storage tiers, it may not be necessary to provide the
storage structure with fire resistance to ensure the
safety of occupants of the building.
Where people can go onto the storage tiers in the
course of their normal use, reduced levels of fire
resistance in the construction of the raised storage
platforms (or even little fire resistance so as to
permit an unprotected steel structure) may also be
acceptable provided the following conditions are
satisfied:
(a) the structure has only one tier and is used for
storage purposes or access to plant or
machinery only;
(b) the number of persons likely to be on the floor
at any one time is low and does not include
members of the public;
75

3.2
Compartmentation
(b) walls dividing buildings into separated parts (in
which the parts can be assessed independently
for the purpose of determining the appropriate
standard of fire resistance); and
Introduction
3.2.1
The spread of fire within a building can be
restricted by sub-dividing it into compartments
separated from one another by walls and/or floors of
fire-resisting construction. The object is twofold:
(c) walls protecting houses from attached or integral
small garages.
Junctions and Protected Shafts
(a) to prevent rapid fire spread which could trap
occupants of the building; and
3.2.3
For compartmentation to be effective, there
should be continuity at the junctions of the fire-
resisting elements enclosing a compartment, and any
openings from one compartment to another should
not present a weakness.
(b) to reduce the chance of fires becoming large, on
the basis that large fires are more dangerous, not
only to occupants but to people in the vicinity of
the building.
Spaces that connect compartments, such as
stairways and service shafts, need to be protected to
restrict fire spread between the compartments, and
they are termed protected shafts.
Compartmentation is complementary to provisions
made under Section B1 for the protection of escape
routes, and to provisions made under Section B4
against the spread of fire between buildings.
Provision of Compartment Walls and
Compartment Floors
The degree of sub-division that is appropriate
depends on:
3.2.4
Compartment walls and compartment floors
should be provided in the circumstances described in
pars. 3.2.4.1 to 3.2.4.7 below, with the provision that
the lowest floor in a building does not need to be
constructed as a compartment floor.
(a) the use of the building, which affects the potential
for fires and the severity of fires, as well as the
ease of evacuation;
(b) the height of the top storey in the building, which
is an indication of the ease of evacuation and the
ability of the fire service to intervene effectively;
and
Provisions for the construction of compartment
walls and compartment floors in different
circumstances are given in 3.2.5.
(c) the availability of a fire suppression system which
affects the growth rate of the fire, and may
suppress it altogether.
Provisions for the protection of openings in
compartment walls and compartment floors are
given in 3.2.6 and 3.2.7.
Forms of Compartmentation
Diagram 11 illustrates schematically various forms of
compartmentation and indicates the paragraph
references for the relevant guidance.
3.2.2
Sub-division is achieved using compartment
walls and compartment floors, and provisions for
their construction are given in pars. 3.2.5 et seq.
These construction provisions vary according to the
function of the wall or floor.
3.2.4.1 All purpose groups - The following
guidance applies to all buildings and all purpose
groups:
Special forms of compartmentation to which
particular construction provisions apply, are:
(a) A wall common to two or more buildings
(separating wall) should be constructed as a
compartment wall;
(a) walls common to two or more buildings
(separating wall);
76

Diagram 11
Compartment walls and compartment floors
Par. 3.2.4
Openings in compartment
walls (see 3.2.6)
Junction with roof (see 3.2.5.10)
Compartment wall
Openings in compartment
floors (see 3.2.6.2)
Junction of compartment wall
or compartment floor with
other walls (see 3.2.5.8)
Compartment floor
Protected shaft (see 3.2.7)
NOTE
The paragraph references indicate the location of the relevant provisions in Section B3 of TGD B.
(b) Compartment walls and/or compartment floors
should be provided to separate parts of a
building that are occupied mainly for different
purposes (see 0.3.2 and Table 0.1), or by
different tenancies, from one another;
3.2.4.2
Dwelling houses - Any wall separating
semi-detached dwelling houses, or houses in a
terrace, should be constructed as a compartment
wall, and the dwelling houses should be considered
as separate buildings.
(c) Where part of a building is used for a purpose
that is ancillary to another purpose (see 0.3.2), it
need not be separated by compartment walls
and/or floors, unless that part is a place of special
fire risk (see 1.0.9);
If a small garage is attached to (or forms part of) a
dwelling house, the garage should be separated from
the rest of the house as indicated in Diagram 12.
3.2.4.3 Flats and maisonettes - In buildings
containing flats (purpose group 1(c)) the following
should be constructed as compartment walls or
compartment floors:
(d) Compartment walls and/or floors should be
provided to separate places of special fire risk
(see 1.0.9) from other parts of a building.
(a) any floor (unless it is within a maisonette, i.e.
between one storey and another within one
dwelling), and
Note: Many of the codes of practice and other
documents referred to in Section B1 (1.1) for the
purpose of the means of escape, identify specific
areas of ancillary accommodation that are regarded
as places of special fire risk.  These areas should also
be separated by way of compartmentation in
accordance with the recommendations contained in
those documents.
(b) any wall separating a flat from any other part of
the building, and
(c) any wall enclosing a refuse storage chamber.
77

Diagram 12
Separation between garage and dwelling house
Par. 3.2.4.2
Floor to have 30
minute fire resistance
Wall to 
have 30 
minute fire
resistance
Garage
100 mm
Fire door (FD 30)
100 mm minimum
(step or upstand)
SECTION
NOTES
1.
Wall and any floor between garage and house to have 30 min. fire resistance.  Any opening in the wall to be at least
100 mm above garage floor level and be fitted with an FD 30 (National) or E30 (European) door.
2.
In the case of a single storey house, in order to maintain a 30 minute standard of fire separation between the house and
the garage, either:
the wall between the house and the garage should be taken up to the underside of the roof, or
the ceiling to the garage should be made fire-resisting.
3.2.4.4
Residential (Institutional) buildings -
The following walls and floors should be constructed
as compartment walls and compartment floors in
Residential (Institutional) buildings (Purpose Group
2(a)):
(a) any floor, other than the floor of the lowest
storey;
(b) any wall needed to sub-divide a storey to
observe the limits for compartment sizes
outlined in Table 3.1.
(a) any floor, other than the floor of the lowest
storey;
3.2.4.6
Non-residential buildings - The
following walls and floors should be constructed as
compartment walls and compartment floors in
buildings of a non-residential purpose group (i.e.
Office, Shop, Shopping centre, Assembly &
Recreation, Industrial, Storage or Other Non-
Residential):
(b) any wall needed to sub-divide a storey to
observe the limits for compartment sizes
outlined in Table 3.1;
(c) any wall needed to sub-divide a storey into at
least two compartments for the purpose of
progressive horizontal evacuation (see 1.2.7).
(a) any wall/floor needed to sub-divide the building
to observe the size limits on compartments given
in Table 3.1;
3.2.4.5
Other residential buildings - The
following walls and floors should be constructed as
compartment walls and compartment floors in
Other Residential buildings (Purpose Group 2(b)):
(b) any floor if the building, or separated part of the
building, has a storey with a floor at a height of
more than 30 m above ground level;
78

(c) the floor of the ground storey if the building has
one or more basements;
(d) any basement floor if the building, or separated
part, has a basement at a depth of more than 10
m below ground level; and
(e) in the case of a shopping centre, any walls or
floors required to comply with the provisions
outlined in 3.2.4.7 below.
3.2.4.7 Shopping centres (Purpose Group
4(b)) - Shopping centres require special provisions
in relation to compartmentation, because of the
nature of the occupancies and the arrangement of
individual units that make up these buildings and the
fact that enclosed pedestrian mall areas are generally
provided between individual units.  While the
majority of units comprise of individual shops of
varying sizes, other uses such as assembly and
recreation or offices may also be provided in
these buildings.  In addition, certain ancillary
accommodation, such as service and storage areas
present particular high fire risk and require
compartmentation.
Compartmentation in shopping complexes should
comply with the recommendations outlined in
section 5 of BS 5588 Fire precautions in the design,
construction and use of buildings, Part 10 Code of
practice for shopping complexes.
Special provisions relating to shopping centres
generally, concerning structural fire protection, are
outlined in 3.5.3.
79

Table 3.1
Maximum area and cubic capacity of a building or compartment
Use
Purpose 
Building 
Maximum floor area (1)
Maximum cubic
Group
form
of any one storey 
capacity (1) of building
in the building or 
or compartment (m3)
compartment (m2)
Residential 
1(a)
any
no limit
no limit
(Dwellings)
1(b)
1(c)
Residential 
2(a)
single storey
3000 (3)
no limit (3)
(Institutional)
more than one storey
1500 (3)
no limit (3)
Other Residential
2(b)
more than one storey
2000 (3)
no limit (3)
Office
3
more than one storey
4600
28000
Shop
4(a)
single storey
4000
20000
more than one storey
2800
7100
Shopping Centre
4(b)
any
see 3.5.3
see 3.5.3
Assembly and 
Recreation, 
5, 8
more than one storey
1900
21000
Other Non-Residential
Industrial (2)
6
single storey
(a)  normal hazard
93000
no limit
(b)  high hazard
33000
no limit
more than one storey
(a)  normal hazard
7500
no limit
(b)  high hazard
2800
17000
Storage (2)
7(a)
single storey
(a)  normal hazard
14000
no limit
(b)  high hazard
1000
no limit
more than one storey
(a)  normal hazard
2800
21000
(b)  high hazard
500
4200
7(b)
car park
no limit
no limit
Notes:
1.
Other factors may also determine the provision of compartment walls and floors (see 3.2.4).  For buildings of any purpose groups, other than
2(a) and 2(b), these figures may be doubled if the building is provided throughout with an appropriate automatic sprinkler system meeting the
relevant recommendations of BS 5306: Part 2: 1990 Fire extinguishing installations and equipment on premises, Part 2 Specification for
sprinkler systems, i.e. the relevant occupancy rating together with additional requirements for life safety.
2.
See Appendix E for guidance on assessment of risk in Industrial and Storage buildings.
3.
In buildings of Purpose Groups 2(a) and 2(b), all floors other than the lowest floor are constructed as compartment floors (see 3.2.4.4 and
3.2.4.5).  In these cases the maximum area of compartment is the limiting factor.
80

Construction of Compartment Floors and
Compartment Walls
3.2.5.3 Fire resistance of timber floors in
existing buildings - In an existing building it may be
possible to increase the fire resistance of existing
timber floors.  The techniques generally adopted to
upgrade the fire resistance of timber floors are as
follows:
3.2.5
Every compartment wall and compartment
floor should:
(a) form a complete barrier to fire between the
compartments they separate;
(a) The addition of a fire-resisting layer, or layers,
beneath the existing floor joists.  There are many
techniques and materials available for such
purposes.  In some cases it is also necessary to
provide a protective layer on top of the existing
floor-boards or between the floor joists.
(b) have the appropriate fire resistance as indicated
in Appendix A, Tables A1 and A2; and
(c) be constructed in accordance with the relevant
guidance in the following pars. 3.2.5.1 to 3.2.5.11.
(b) Filling the voids between the existing floor
surface and ceiling below, or between the floor
joists, with a suitable material.  There are a
number of proprietary systems available which
are based on this method.  These are often more
appropriate than the method outlined at (a)
above in buildings of historic or architectural
interest, where existing plasterwork is to be
retained.
The performance requirements for fire resisting
elements of construction are indicated in Appendix
A,  paragraph A5.
3.2.5.1 Compartment floors in residential
(Institutional) buildings - In a building of Purpose
Group 2(a), Residential (Institutional), all
compartment floors should be constructed of non-
combustible materials (see Appendix A, Table A8).
Many of the techniques employed in upgrading
timber floors involve the use of proprietary materials
and systems.  These must be capable of achieving the
required performance in the situations for which
they are adopted.  Particular care and attention to
detail in the execution of any such upgrading works
is necessary to ensure the required performance.
An exception to the requirement for non-
combustible compartment floors may be made in the
case of a material alteration of an existing Residential
(Institutional) building.
3.2.5.2 Compartment floors in high buildings -
In a building of any purpose group, where the height
of the top storey is 10 m or more (see Appendix C,
Diagram 38), any compartment floor which is
required to have a fire resistance of 60 minutes or
more should be constructed of non-combustible
materials (see Appendix A, Table A8), apart from
any floor finish.
Table 14 of Building Research Establishment Report
"Guidelines for the construction of fire-resisting
structural elements (BR 128, 1988)" provides
guidance in relation to the construction of fire-
resisting timber floors.  Guidance on fire-resisting
timber floors is also available from the Timber
Research and Development Association (TRADA)
and in the trade literature produced by
manufacturers of fire protection materials and
products.
An exception to the requirement for non-
combustible compartment floors may be made in the
case of an existing floor in an existing building used
for any purpose other than Residential (Institutional),
Purpose Group 2(a).
Guidance on upgrading the fire resistance of existing
timber floors is provided in Building Research Digest
number 208 "Increasing the fire resistance of existing
timber floors (revised 1988)".
Note: The non-combustibility requirement does not
apply in the case of a material alteration of an
existing Residential (Institutional) building (see
3.2.5.1).
3.2.5.4
Compartment walls - In a building of
purpose group 2(a), Residential (Institutional) and in
a building of any purpose group, where the height of
the top storey is 10 m or more (see Appendix C,
81

Diagram 38), a compartment wall which is required
to have a fire resistance of one hour or more should
be constructed of materials of limited combustibility
(see Appendix A, Table A7), apart from any wall
surface complying with the requirements of B2,
internal fire spread (linings).
such ducts should be protected and fire-stopped in
accordance with Section 3.4 of this Document. No
services should pass through separating walls of this
construction type.
3.2.5.8 Separated parts - Compartment walls
used to form a separated part of a building (see 3.2.2
(b)) should run the full height of the building in a
continuous vertical plane.
3.2.5.5 Separating walls - Compartment walls
that are common to two or more buildings
(separating walls) should run the full height of the
building in a continuous vertical plane and should be
constructed of non-combustible (see Appendix A,
Table A8) materials. Adjoining buildings should only
be separated by walls, not floors.  A compartment
wall being used to divide a building into separate
occupancies or uses would not be subject to this
provision.
3.2.5.9 Junction of compartment wall or
compartment floor with other walls - Where a
compartment wall or compartment floor meets
another compartment wall, or an external wall, the
junction should maintain the fire resistance of the
compartmentation.
There are provisions in Section B1 in relation to the
junction of an external wall and the enclosure to a
protected stairway (see 1.3.6.6).
3.2.5.6 Separating walls in dwelling houses -
An exception to the requirement for separating walls
to be constructed of non-combustible materials may
be permitted in the case of a separating wall
between buildings of Purpose Group 1(a) Residential
(Dwellings) of one or two storeys only, where the
wall is part of a timber frame construction system
consisting only of a structural frame of combustible
materials, and the design, materials and workmanship
used in the manufacture and construction of the wall
are in accordance with the provisions of Technical
Guidance 
Document 
D 
(Materials 
and
Workmanship).
Consideration may also be required in the case of
junctions of compartment walls and re-entrant or
opposing elevations of the same building (see
3.2.5.10).
3.2.5.10
Courtyards, light-wells and opposite
elevations of the same building - In the case of
buildings which contains courtyards, light-wells or
wings, the unprotected areas on opposing or
adjacent elevations could contribute to the transfer
of fire between compartments.  An important area in
this respect is where a compartment wall meets at
the junction formed by the internal angle of two
elevations to a building.  In this situation, the
external walls should be protected on one or both
elevations for a sufficient distance to limit the
potential for horizontal fire spread between the
compartments.  In other situations, to limit fire
spread between different compartments, it may be
necessary to consider the space separation between
opposing elevations.
3.2.5.7
Accommodation of Services in
Compartment Walls/Floors and Separating
Walls - The construction of compartment walls and
floors, and separating walls, may be such that the
achievement of the required fire resistance
performance (see Paragraph 3.2.5 and Appendix A)
relies primarily on the integrity of the linings of such
constructions, e.g. framed structures with walls
which incorporate plasterboard or similar fire
resistant linings and an enclosed void, hollow floor
construction with fire resistance provided by floor
deck material and ceiling board. The integrity of the
linings of such constructions should not be breached
to allow for the installation of services, e.g. pipes,
wires, flues (including manufactured flues), except
where necessary to allow services pass through
these compartment walls or floors. Services may be
surface mounted or accommodated in service ducts
or within service cavities created external to the
unbreached linings of the fire resistant compartment
wall or floor. Where services pass through these
compartment walls or floors, they should be
contained in fire resistant ducts and the opening of
In the case of a Residential (Institutional) building,
where the means of escape (see Section B1) have
been designed on the basis of progressive horizontal
evacuation, special consideration is required for the
junctions between compartment walls and the
external elevations of the building (see 3.5.4).
3.2.5.11
Junction of compartment wall and
roof - The junction between a compartment wall
and the roof of a building should be capable of
restricting fire spread between compartments.  A
82

compartment wall should be taken up to meet the
underside of the roof covering or deck and fire
stopped where necessary at the wall/roof junction.
A compartment wall should not be stopped at ceiling
level while using a cavity barrier in the roof space to
continue the line of compartment to the roof.  The
construction of the wall, particularly between any
ceiling and the roof, should not contain
imperfections that would provide a route for fire
penetration or premature failure of the fire
resistance performance of the wall.  The gap
between the wall and the underside of the roof
should be as small as practicable (generally not
greater than 50 mm) and be filled with suitable fire
stopping material over the full width of the wall.
roof deck and be fire stopped with resilient non-
combustible fire stopping material over the full
width of the wall (see Diagram 13(A)).
Note: where the roof deck comprises a double-
skin insulated sheet, the insulating material
directly above the compartment wall should be
of limited combustibility (see A18 and Table A7
of Appendix A) for a width of not less than 300
mm which forms a fire stopping seal to the cavity
between the inner and outer skins.  In the case
of a non-insulated double skin roof deck, similar
fire stopping should also be provided.
(b) in buildings not more than 15 m high (see
Diagram 37, Appendix C) which are used as
dwellings, residential (except institutional),
offices, or assembly, timber tiling battens or
combustible boarding not exceeding 25 mm in
thickness used as a substrate to the roof
covering may be carried over the compartment
wall, provided that they are fully bedded in
mortar or other suitable non-combustible fire
stopping material for the full width of the wall,
and any cavities within the thickness of the roof,
above and below the sarking felt or similar
membrane along the line of the wall and at the
eaves are adequately fire stopped (see Diagram
13(B)).
Where structural roof members such as beams,
purlins and rafters are built into or carried across a
masonry or concrete compartment wall, any
openings for them should be as small as practicable
and any gaps should be effectively fire stopped with
non-combustible fire stopping material over the full
width of the wall.  Where a trussed rafter supporting
a roof is carried across a compartment wall it
should be designed so that failure due to fire in one
compartment will not cause failure of any part of the
truss in another compartment.  No structural roof
member should be carried across a compartment
wall which is also a separating wall.
The design and detailing of the junction between a
compartment wall and any roof valley, gutter or
other roof configuration, should be carefully
considered so as to ensure that a means is not
provided at the junction for premature fire spread
between compartments.
(c) As an alternative to (a) or (b) above the
compartment wall may be extended above the
line of the external roof surface by a height of
not less than 375 mm to form a parapet wall (see
Diagram 13(C)).
(d) As an alternative to (a), (b) or (c) above for any
building type, any other system which has been
shown by test to be equally effective in
restricting the spread of fire at a compartment
wall/roof junction may be used.
If a fire penetrates a roof near a compartment wall
there is a risk that it will spread over the roof to the
adjoining compartment.  To reduce that risk, the
junction between a compartment wall and a roof
should be constructed in accordance with the
following:
(a) a zone of the roof at 1.5 m wide on both sides of
the wall should have a covering of class
BROOF(t4) (European class) or AA, AB or AC
(National class) (see table A5 to Appendix A) on
a non-combustible (see table A8 to Appendix A)
sub-strate or deck.  The compartment wall
,should be carried up to the underside of the
83

Diagram 13  
Junction of compartment wall with roof
Par. 3.2.5.10
A.
BUILDING OR COMPARTMENT AT ANY HEIGHT AND USE
Roof covering to be of class BROOF
(t4) (European class) or to be 
designated AA, AB or AC (National
class) on deck of material of limited
combustibility over at least this 
distance. Roof covering and deck
could be composite structure, eg 
profiled steel cladding.
Double skinned insulated roof 
sheeting should incorporate a band
of material of limited combustability
at least 300mm wide centred over
the wall.
1.5 m
1.5 m
Resilient firestopping to be carried
up to underside of roof covering.
B.
DWELLING HOUSE AND BUILDING OR COMPARTMENT IN RESIDENTIAL 
(EXCEPT INSTITUTIONAL), OFFICE, OR ASSEMBLY USE NOT MORE THAN 15 m HIGH
Roof covering to be of class BROOF
(t4) (European class) or to be 
designated AA, AB or AC (National
Class) on deck of material of limited
combustability over at least this 
distance.
Boarding (used aas a substrate), 
woodwool slabs or timber tiling 
battens may be carried over the 
wall provided that they are fully 
bedded in mortar (or other 
non-combustable fire stopping 
material) where over the wall.
1.5 m
1.5 m
Mineral fibre quilt
Firestopping to be carried up to 
underside of roof covering.
50 mm thick wire
reinforced mineral
wool
TYPICAL EAVES DETAIL
C.
PARAPET WALL (ALTERNATIVE DETAIL, AND BUILDING)
Roof surface
375 mm minimum
Roof
Roof
Compartment wall
84

Openings Between Compartments
Protected Shafts
3.2.6
Any door openings in compartment walls
should be protected by means of fire doors, in
accordance with the provisions outlined in Appendix
B and Table B1. Openings for the passage of pipes,
ducts and other services should be protected in
accordance with the provisions outlined in
sub-section 3.4.
3.2.7
Any stairway or other shaft passing directly
from one compartment to another, should be
enclosed so as to delay or prevent the spread of fire
between compartments, and is termed a protected
shaft.
If the protected shaft is a stairway, see also B1 for
provisions relating to protected stairways and B5 if
the stairway also serves as a fire-fighting stairway.
3.2.6.1
Openings in separating walls - Any
openings in a wall which is common to two or more
buildings should be limited to those for:
3.2.7.1 Construction of protected shafts - The
construction enclosing a protected shaft (see
Diagram 14) should:
(a) a door which is needed to provide a means of
escape in case of fire and which has the same fire
resistance as that required for the wall (see
Appendix B, Table B1) and is fitted in accordance
with the provisions of Appendix B; and
(a) form a complete barrier to fire between
the different compartments which the shaft
connects;
(b) the passage of a pipe which meets the provisions
in Section 3.4.
(b) have the appropriate fire resistance given in
Appendix A, Table A1, except for glazed screens
which meet the provisions of par. 3.2.7.3;
3.2.6.2 Openings in other compartment walls
or in compartment floors - Openings in
compartment walls (other than those described in
par. 3.2.6.1) or compartment floors should be
limited to those for:
(c) meet the requirements of section 3.2.5 for the
construction of compartment walls; and
(d) satisfy the provisions about their use, ventilation
and the treatment of openings in the paragraphs
below.
(a) doors which have the appropriate fire resistance
given in Appendix B, Table B1, and are fitted in
accordance with the provisions of Appendix B;
and
3.2.7.2 Use for protected shafts - The uses of
protected shafts should be restricted to stairways,
lifts, escalators, chutes, ducts, pipes, and/or as
sanitary accommodation and washrooms.
(b) the passage of pipes, ventilation ducts, chimneys,
appliance ventilation ducts or ducts encasing one
or more flue pipes, which meet the provisions in
sub-section 3.4; and
3.2.7.3 Glazed screens to protected shafts -
Where a protected shaft contains a stairway, but is
not a fire-fighting shaft (see B5), and is entered from
a protected corridor or lobby, the part of the
enclosure between the shaft and the corridor or
lobby may incorporate glass so as to provide at least
30 minutes fire resistance in terms of integrity only,
if the principles in Diagram 15 and the provisions of
Table A4 of Appendix A are met.
(c) refuse chutes of non-combustible construction;
and
(d) protected shafts which meet the relevant
provisions below; and
(e) Atria designed in accordance with BS 5588 Part
7.
85

Diagram 14
Protected shafts (construction)
Par. 3.2.7.1
Compartment wall
B
External wall
(see also
Diagram 7)
A
C
A
Protected shaft bounded on
three sides by compartment walls
and on fourth by an external wall.
B
Protected shaft bounded on
four sides by compartment walls.
C
Protected shaft, (services
duct) bounded on four sides
by compartment walls.
The shaft structure (including any openings) should meet the relevant provisions:
-for compartment walls see paragraphs 3.2.5, 3.2.6, 3.2.7
-for external walls see section B4 (4.1 and 4.2) and B1 (1.4.2.4).
Diagram 15  
Glazed screen separating protected shaft from 
Par. 3.2.7.3  Table A1  
lobby or corridor
Protected shaft
Protected shaft
Corridor
Glazed area
Glazed area
Lobby
1.
WITH PROTECTED CORRIDOR
2.
WITH LOBBY
KEY
Fire-resistance provision for enclosure,  (of not more than 60 minutes)
Fire-resistance of construction to be at least 30 minutes (including doors)
Fire-resistance of glazing to be at least 30 minutes (including doors)
Note:  For limitations on the use of uninsulated fire-resisting glazed elements on escape routes, see Table A4 to Appendix A.
86

3.2.7.4  Pipes for oil or gas in protected shafts
- If a protected shaft contains a stairway and/or lift, it
should not also contain a pipe conveying oil or gas
(other than hydraulic oil in the mechanism of a
hydraulic lift) or contain a ventilating duct (other
than a duct provided for the purposes of pressurizing
the stairway to keep it smoke free).
(iv) the passage of lift cables into a lift motor
room (if the shaft contains a lift). If the motor
room is at the bottom of the shaft, the
openings should be as small as practicable.
3.2.7.7  Buildings containing one or more atria
- Detailed guidance on all issues relating to the
incorporation of atria in buildings is given in BS 5588
Part 7 Code of practice for incorporation of atria in
buildings.  However it should be noted that for the
purposes of TGD B, the standard is relevant only
where the atrium breaches any compartmentation.
3.2.7.5
Ventilation of protected shafts
conveying gas - A protected shaft conveying piped
flammable gas should be adequately ventilated direct
to the outside of the building.
3.2.7.6
Openings into protected shafts - An
external wall of a protected shaft does not normally
need to have fire resistance, unless it is a fire-fighting
shaft, (see B5), or if it contains a stairway, and the
layout is such that it may expose persons to risk.
Openings in other parts of the enclosure to a
protected shaft should be limited as follows:
(a) Where part of the enclosure to a protected shaft
is a wall common to two or more buildings (i.e. a
separating wall), only the following openings
should be made in that wall:
(i) a door which is needed to provide a means
of escape in case of fire and which has the
same fire resistance as that required for the
wall (see Appendix B, Table B1) and is fitted
in accordance with the provisions of
Appendix B; and
(ii) the passage of a pipe which meets the
provisions in sub-section 3.4.
(b) Other parts of the enclosure (other than an
external wall) should only have openings for:
(i) doors which have the appropriate fire
resistance given in Appendix B, Table B1, and
are fitted in accordance with the provisions
of Appendix B; and
(ii) the passage of pipes which meet the
provisions in sub-section 3.4; and
(iii) inlets to, outlets from and openings for a
ventilation duct, (if the shaft contains or
serves as a ventilating duct) which meet the
provisions in sub-section 3.4; and
87

3.3 Concealed Spaces (Cavities)
Provision of Cavity Barriers
Introduction
3.3.2
Cavity barriers should be provided in
accordance with Table 3.2 in specified locations for
different purpose groups.
3.3.1
Hidden voids in the construction of a
building provide a ready route for smoke and flame
spread. This is particularly so in the case of voids
above other spaces in a building, e.g. above a
suspended ceiling or in a roof space. As the spread is
concealed, it presents a greater danger than would a
more obvious weakness in the fabric of the building.
Provisions are made to restrict this by interrupting
cavities which could form a pathway around a barrier
to fire, and sub-dividing extensive cavities.
The dimensions of concealed spaces should be in
accordance with the provisions outlined in 3.3.3.
Diagram 16 illustrates the need for cavity barriers at
the intersection of fire resisting construction and
elements containing a concealed space.
It should be noted that cavity barriers should not be
provided above compartment walls as these walls
are required to be carried up full storey height, to a
compartment floor or to the roof as appropriate,
(see 3.2.5.10). The fire resistance standards for cavity
barriers are lower than for a compartment wall, and
it is important to use a compartment wall in this
situation to maintain the standard of fire resistance.
Diagram 16  
Interrupting concealed spaces (cavities)
Par. 3.3.2
Wall with
cavity
Compartment
floor
Cavity
barrier
Cavity barrier
Compartment floor
Suspended ceiling
Compartment wall
must carry up to
compartment floor
Fire-resisting wall but not
necessarily a compartment
wall.
SECTION
SECTION
Wall with
cavity
Wall with
cavity
Fire door
Cavity
barrier
Cavity
barrier
Fire-resisting wall
but not necessarily
a compartment wall
Compartment wall
PLAN 
PLAN
Note:
For exceptions to provision of cavity barriers in external cavity walls see par. 3.3.3 and Diagram 17.
88

Table 3.2
Provision of cavity barriers
Purpose Group in which the provision applies
Cavity Barriers to be provided
1(a) & 1(b)
1(c)
2(a) & 2(b)
3-8
1.
At the top of an external cavity wall which does not
comply with Diagram 17 and at the junction of any such
wall with a separating wall.
•
•
•
•
2.
Above the enclosures to a protected stairway in a
house of 3 or more storeys (see Diagram 18(a)(1).
•
o
o
o
3.
At the junction between an external cavity wall which
does not comply with Diagram 17, and every
compartment floor and compartment wall.
o
•
•
•
4.
At the junction between a cavity wall which does not
comply with Diagram 17, and every compartment floor,
compartment wall, or other wall or door assembly
which forms a fire-resisting barrier.
o
•
•
•
5.
In a protected escape route, above any fire-resisting
construction which is not carried full storey height,
or (in the case of a top storey) to the underside of the
roof covering (1).
o
•
•
•
6.
Above any bedroom partitions which are not carried
full storey height, or (in the case of a top storey) to the
underside of the roof covering (1).
o
o
•
o
7.
Where a corridor (which is not a protected corridor)
should be sub-divided to prevent fire or smoke from
affecting the routes to two exits simultaneously
(see B1, sub-section 1.2 and Diagram 20(a)), above any
corridor enclosures which are not carried full storey
height, or (in the case of a top storey) to the underside
of the roof covering (2).
o
o
•
•
8.
To sub-divide any cavity (including any roof space)
void so that the distance between cavity barriers does
not exceed the dimensions given in Table 3.3.
o
o
•
•
Notes:
•
denotes that provision of cavity barriers apply.
o
denotes that provision of cavity barriers do not apply.
(1)
The provisions in items 2, 5 and 6 of this table do not apply where the cavity is enclosed on the lower side by a fire-resisting ceiling (as shown in
Diagram 19 and Diagram 18(b)) which extends throughout the building, compartment or separated part.
(2)
The provision in item 7 of this table does not apply where the storey is sub-divided by fire-resisting construction carried full storey height and
passing through the line of sub-division of the corridor (see Diagram 20(b)), or where the cavity is enclosed on the lower side as described in Note
(1).
89

Diagram 17
Masonry cavity walls excluded from provisions for 
Table 3.2  Par. 3.3.3  
cavity barriers
Close cavity at top
of wall unless totally
filled with insulation
PLAN
Close cavity at
top of opening
Opening
Combustible material should not be placed in or exposed to the
cavity except for:
Cavity closers
at cill and
jambs also
(a) Timber lintel, window or door frame,  or end of
timber joists
(b) Pipe, conduit or cable
Two block or brick
leaves at least 75 mm
thick.
(c) DPC, flashing closer or wall tie
(d) Domestic meter cupboard provided that
- there are not more than two cupboards to a dwelling
- the opening in the outer wall leaf is not more than
Cavity wall
800 mm x 500 mm for each cupboard, and
- the inner leaf is not penetrated except by a sleeve not
more than 80 mm x 80 mm which is firestopped
SECTION
(e) Thermal insulating material.
90

Diagram 18
Roofspaces over protected stairway in dwelling houses 
Table 3.2  
of three or more storeys (alternative arrangements)
Roof space
Cavity barrier
Fire-resisting enclosure to stairway
(a) WITH CAVITY BARRIER(S)
Roof space
Ceiling to comply
with Diagram 19
Fire-resisting enclosure to stairway
(b)
WITH FIRE-RESISTING CEILING
Diagram 19
Fire resisting ceiling below a concealed space
Table 3.2
Floor or roof cavity
Ceiling surface - class C - s3, d2 (European) or
class 1(National)
Fire-resisting ceiling
Soffit of ceiling - class B - s3, d2 (European) or class 0
(National)
Ceiling surface facing cavity to have surface spread of flame at least class C - s3,d2 (European) or class 1 (National).
Exposed ceiling surface to be class B - s3,d2 (European) or class 0 (National).
Additionally, the ceiling should:
1.
- have at least 30 minute fire-resistance, and
2.
- be imperforate except for an opening allowed under paragraph 3.3.5, and
3.
- extend throughout the building or compartment, and
4.
- not be demountable.
91

Diagram 20
Corridor subdivision (alternative arrangements)
Table 3.2
A
Protected stairway
Protected stairway
A
PLAN
Floor
Void
Cavity barriers
Ceiling (not fire-resisting in
accordance with Diagram 19)
SECTION AA
Cavity barriers in ceiling void over corridor walls
(a) CAVITY BARRIERS ABOVE CORRIDOR ENCLOSURE
B
C
C
Protected stairway
Protected stairway
B
D
D
PLAN
Floor
Floor
Floor
Void
Cavity barrier
Ceiling (not
fire-resisting
in accordance
with Diagram
19)
Fire resisting
construction
Fire door
SECTION BB 
No cavity barriers over corridor
SECTION CC
SECTION DD
Storey subdivision
(b) SUBDIVISION OF STOREY
92

Maximum Dimensions of Concealed
Spaces
better (European) or Class O (National) and
the supports and fixings of the suspended
ceiling in the cavity are of non-combustible
construction;
3.3.3
The dimensions of cavities (i.e. the maximum
un-divided concealed space) should not exceed
those specified in Table 3.3.
(d) the flame spread rating of any pipe insulation
system is Class C - s3, d2 (European) or
Class 1 (National);
Table 3.3
Maximum dimensions of cavities
(e) any electrical wiring in the void is laid in
metal trays or in metal conduit; and
Location of 
Class of surface 
Maximum 
Cavity
exposed in cavity 
dimension in any 
(excluding surface of 
direction (m)
any pipe, cable or
conduit, or insulation
to any pipe)
(f) any other materials in the cavity are of
limited combustibility.
(3) in a wall which should be fire-resisting only
because it is loadbearing;
Between a roof 
and a ceiling
Any Class
20
Any other cavity
Class C - s3,d2 (European)
20
or class 1 (National)
(4) in a masonry or concrete external cavity wall as
shown in Diagram 17;
Any other class
10
(5) in a floor or a roof space where the cavity is
enclosed on the lower side by a fire-resisting
ceiling (as shown in Diagram 19) which extends
throughout the building, compartment or
separated part, subject to a limit of 30 m on the
extent of any such cavity;
The provisions of Table 3.3 do not apply to any
cavity described at (1) to (8) below:
(1) Where any room under a ceiling cavity exceeds
the dimensions given, cavity barriers need only
be provided on the line of the enclosing
walls/partitions of that room - subject to cavity
barriers not being more than 40 m apart in any
direction and the surface of the material/product
exposed in the cavity being Class C – s3, d2 or
better (European class) or Class 0 or Class 1
(National classes);
(6) below a floor next to the ground or oversite
concrete, if the cavity is less than 1 m in height
or if the cavity is not normally accessible by
persons, unless there are openings in the floor
such that it is possible for litter to accumulate in
the cavity (in which case cavity barriers should
be provided, and access should be provided to
the cavity for cleaning);
(2) Where the cavity is over an undivided area and is
used as a plenum and exceeds 40 m (in both
directions on plan), there is no limit to the size
of the cavity if:
(7) formed by over-cladding an existing masonry (or
concrete) external wall, or an existing concrete
roof, provided that the cavity does not contain
combustible insulation; and
(a) the room and the cavity together are
compartmented from the rest of the building;
(8) between double-skinned corrugated or profiled
insulated roof and wall sheeting if the sheeting is
a material of limited combustibility and both
surfaces of the insulating layer have a surface
spread of flame of at least  Class C - s3, d2
European or at least Class 1 (National) (see
Appendix A) and make contact with the inner
and outer skins of cladding (see Diagram 21).
(b) an automatic fire detection and alarm system
is fitted in the building with smoke detectors
in the cavity and in the return air ducting,
and which stops circulation of the ventilation
system and switches it to extract;
(c) The surface of the material or product used
in the construction of the ceiling and which is
exposed in the cavity is Class B-s3, d2 or
93

Diagram 21
Double-skinned insulated roof and wall sheeting excluded from 
Par. 3.3.3 
provisions in Table 3.3
(a) ACCEPTABLE WITHOUT CAVITY BARRIERS
(b)  CAVITY BARRIERS NECESSARY
Note
The insulation should make contact with both 
skins of sheeting.
Construction and Fixings for Cavity
Barriers
Cavity barriers should also be fixed so that their
performance is unlikely to be made ineffective by:
(a) movement of the building due to subsidence,
shrinkage or thermal change;
3.3.4
Every cavity barrier should be constructed
to provide at least 30 minutes fire resistance (see
Appendix A, Table A1, item 16).
(b) collapse in a fire of any services penetrating
them;
Notes:
(a) any cavity barrier required in a stud wall or
partition may, however, be formed of -
(c) failure in a fire of their fixings; or
(i) steel at least 0.5 mm thick, or
(d) failure in a fire of any material or construction
which they abut.
(ii) timber at least 38 mm thick, or
For example, if a suspended ceiling is continued over
the top of a fire-resisting wall or partition and direct
connection is made between the ceiling and the
cavity barrier above the line of the wall or partition,
premature failure of the cavity barrier can occur
when the ceiling collapses. However, this does not
arise if the ceiling is designed to provide fire
protection of 30 minutes or more.
(iii) polythene sleeved mineral wool, or mineral
wool slab, in either case under compression
when installed in the cavity.
(b) a cavity barrier may be formed by any
construction provided for another purpose if it
meets the provisions for cavity barriers.
Cavity barriers should be tightly fitted to rigid
construction and mechanically fixed in position
wherever possible. Where this is not possible (for
example, in the case of a junction with slates, tiles,
corrugated sheeting or similar materials) the junction
should be fire-stopped.
94

Openings in Cavity Barriers
3.3.5
Any openings in a cavity barrier should be
limited to those for:
(a) doors which have at least 20 minutes fire
resistance (see Appendix B, Table B1, item 8(a))
and are fitted in accordance with the provisions
of Appendix B; and
(b) the passage of pipes which meet the provisions in
sub-section 3.4; and
(c) the passage of cables or conduits containing one
or more cables; and
(d) openings fitted with a suitably mounted
automatic fire shutter; and
(e) ducts which (unless they are fire-resisting) are
fitted with a suitably mounted automatic fire
shutter where they pass through the cavity
barrier.
95

3.4. Protection of Openings and
Fire-Stopping
Alternative B: Pipes with a restricted
diameter
Introduction
Where a proprietary sealing system is not used, fire-
stopping may be used around the pipe, keeping the
opening as small as possible. The nominal internal
diameter of the pipe should not be more than the
relevant dimension given in Table 3.4.
3.4.1
Earlier sections of this Document describe
the provision of barriers to fire, and the
circumstances in which there may be openings in
them.  This Section deals with the protection of
openings in such barriers.
The diameters given in Table 3.4 for pipes of
specification (b) used in situation (2) assume that the
pipes are part of an above ground drainage system
and are enclosed as shown in Diagram 22. If they are
not, the smaller diameter given in situation (3)
should be used instead.
If an element that is intended to provide fire
separation (i.e. it has requirements for fire resistance
in terms of integrity and insulation) is to be effective,
then every joint, or imperfection of fit, or opening to
allow services to pass through the element, should
be adequately protected by sealing or fire-stopping
so that the fire resistance of the element is not
impaired. Building service installations should be
designed in accordance with BS 8313: 1989 (section
12).  The provisions of this Section also apply to
openings in protected corridors which are provided
for the protection of the means of escape (see B1).
Alternative C: Sleeving
A pipe of lead, aluminium, aluminium alloy, asbestos-
cement or uPVC, with a maximum nominal internal
diameter of 160 mm, may be used with a sleeving of
non-combustible pipe as shown in Diagram 23. The
specification for non-combustible and uPVC pipes is
given in the notes to Table 3.4.
Provisions for door openings and fire doors are
given in Appendix B because they are relevant to B1
and B5, as well as B3.
Ventilating Ducts
3.4.3
Ventilation and air conditioning ducts which
pass from one compartment to another should be
protected in accordance with the recommendations
contained in BS 5588: Part 9 Code of practice for
ventilation and air conditioning ductwork.
The measures are intended to delay the passage of
fire. They generally have the additional benefit of
retarding smoke spread but the test specified in
Appendix A for integrity does not stipulate criteria
for the passage of smoke as such.
Flues, etc.
Openings for Pipes
3.4.4
If a flue, or duct containing flues or appliance
ventilation duct(s), passes through a compartment
wall or compartment floor, or is built into a
compartment wall, the walls of the flue or duct
should have a fire resistance of at least half that of
the wall or floor in order to prevent the by-passing
of the compartmentation (see Diagram 24).  The
walls enclosing the flue or duct should be of solid
non-combustible construction.
3.4.2
Pipes which pass through a compartment
wall or compartment floor (unless the pipe is in a
protected shaft), or cavity barrier, should meet the
appropriate provisions in alternatives A, B or C
below.
Alternative A: Proprietary Seals (any pipe
diameter)
Provide a proprietary sealing system which has been
shown by test to maintain the fire resistance of the
wall, floor or cavity barrier.
Fire-Stopping
3.4.5
In addition to any other provisions in this
document for fire-stopping:
96

(a) joints between elements which serve as a barrier
to the passage of fire should be fire-stopped; and
Proprietary sealing systems (including those designed
for service penetrations) which have been shown by
test to maintain the fire resistance of the wall or
other element are available.
(b) all openings for pipes, ducts, conduits or cables
to pass through any part of an element which
serves as a barrier to the passage of fire should
be -
Other suitable fire-stopping materials include:
• cement or lime mortar,
(i) kept as few in number as possible, and
• gypsum based plaster,
(ii) kept as small as practicable, and
• cement or gypsum based vermiculite/perlite
mixes,
(iii) fire-stopped (which in the case of a pipe or
ducts, should allow thermal movement).
• glass fibre, mineral wood, crushed rock, blast
furnace slag or ceramic based products (with or
without resin binders),
To prevent displacement, materials used for fire-
stopping should be reinforced with (or supported
by) materials of limited combustibility in the
following circumstances:
• intumescent mastics.
(a) in all cases where the unsupported span is
greater than 100 mm, and
These may be used only in situations which are
suitable for the particular fire-stopping materials.
(b) in any other case where non-rigid materials are
used (unless they have been shown to be
satisfactory by test).
Table 3.4
Maximum nominal internal diameter of pipes
Purpose
(a)
(b)
(c)
Non-combustible 
Lead, aluminium 
any other material
material (1)
or aluminium alloy,
fibre- cement
or uPVC (2)
1.
Structure (but not separating 
wall) enclosing a protected shaft 
which is not a stairway or lift shaft
160
110
40
2.
Separating wall between dwelling 
houses (4), or compartment wall or 
compartment floor between flats
160
160 (stack pipe)(3)
40
110 (branch pipe)(3)
3.
Any other situation
160
40
40
Notes:
1.
A non-combustible material (such as cast iron or steel) which, if exposed to a temperature of 800°C will neither soften nor fracture to
the extent that flame or hot gases will pass through the wall of the pipe.
2.
uPVC pipes complying with BS 4514:  1983, and uPVC pipes complying with BS 5255:  1989.
3.
Pipes forming part of an above ground drainage system and enclosed as shown in Diagram 22.
4.
See 3.2.5.5 for situations where no pipes, wires or other services are allowed in separating walls between houses.
97

Diagram 22
Enclosures for drainage or water supply pipes
Par. 3.4.2
Casing
Vent pipe
Roof space
Enclosure
Provide casing if
separating wall is
penetrated by
branch pipe at this
storey
Compartment floor
carried through to 
seal enclosure - provide
firestopping between
stack and floor
Intermediate floor
Floor carried through
to seal enclosure - 
provide fire stopping 
between stack pipe
and floor
Enclosure
Intermediate floor
carried through to seal
enclosure - provide
firestopping between
stack pipe and floor
Separating wall
Compartment wall
Casing
Stack pipe
Compartment floor
Stack pipe
(a)
DWELLING HOUSE WITH ANY NUMBER OF STOREYS
(B)
OTHER BUILDINGS
Notes 
1.
The enclosure should:
(a) be bounded by a separating wall, a compartment wall or floor, an outside wall, an intermediate floor, or a casing
(see specification at 2 below), and
(b) have internal surfaces (except framing members) of Class O, and
(c) not have an access panel which opens into a circulation space or a bedroom, and
(d) be used only for drainage, water supply or vent pipes.
2.
The casing should:
(a) be imperforate except for an opening for a pipe or an access panel, and
(b) not be of sheet metal, and
(c) have not less than 30 minute fire resistance, including any access panel.
3. The opening for a pipe, either in the structure or the casing, should be as small as possible and firestopped around the pipe.
Diagram 23
Pipes penetrating a compartment wall or floor (sleeving)
Par. 3.4.2
Not less than 1 m
Not less than 1 m
Fire stopping
Pipe specification (b)
Sleeve (or pipe) of specification (a) to be in
contact with pipe
Notes
1.
Make the opening in the structure as small as possible and provide firestopping between pipe and structure.
2.
See Table 3.4 for materials specification.
98

Diagram 24
Flues and compartment walls or floors
Par. 3.4.4
1.
FLUE PASSING THROUGH COMPARTMENT
WALL OR FLOOR
2.
FLUE BUILT INTO COMPARTMENT WALL
Flue
Flue wall
Compartment wall 
Compartment wall
or floor
Flue wall
Flue wall
SECTION
PLAN
Flue walls should have a fire resistance of at least one
half of that required for the compartment wall or floor,
and be of non-combustible construction.
In each case flue walls should have a fire resistance of at
least one half of that required for the compartment wall
and be of non-combustible construction.
99

3.5 Special Provisions
(b) any fire door; and
Introduction
(c) any attendants kiosk not exceeding 15 m2 in area.
3.5.2.2 Open-sided car parks - If the building, or
separated part containing the car park, complies with
the following provisions (in addition to those in par.
3.5.2.1) it may be regarded as an open-sided car park
for the purposes of fire resistance assessment in
Appendix A, Table A2, and for the purposes of space
separation in B4, Table 4.3, it may be regarded as a
small building or compartment.
3.5.1
This 
Section 
describes 
additional
considerations which apply to the design and
construction of Car Parks, Shopping Centres,
Residential (Institutional) buildings and buildings
containing an atrium.
Car Parks
3.5.2
Buildings or parts of buildings used as
parking for cars and other light vehicles are unlike
other buildings in certain respects, and merit some
departures from the usual provisions for the
restriction of fire spread within buildings because:
(a) There should not be any basement storeys.
(b) Each storey should be naturally ventilated by
permanent openings at each level having an
aggregate area not less than 5% of the floor area
at that level, of which at least half should be in
two opposing walls.
(a) The fire load is well defined and not particularly
high;
(b) Where the car park is well venitlated, there is a
low probability of fire spread from one storey to
another.  Ventilation is the important factor, and
as heat and smoke cannot be dissipated so
readily from a car park that is not open-sided
fewer concessions are made.  The guidance in
paragraphs 3.5.2.2 to 3.5.2.5 is concerned with
three ventilation methods; open-sided (high level
of natural ventilation), natural ventilation and
mechanical ventilation.
(c) If the building is also used for any other purpose,
the part forming the car park is a separated part
(see Appendix D for definition).
3.5.2.3 Car parks which are not open-sided -
Where it is not possible to provide the degree of
natural ventilation set out in par. 3.5.2.2 above, the
building is not classified as open-sided and a different
standard of fire resistance is required (refer to Table
A2, Appendix A).  Such car parks require ventilation,
which may be by natural or mechanical means.
Provisions are set out in pars. 3.5.2.4 and 3.5.2.5
below.  The provisions in par. 3.5.2.1 above apply in
all cases.
Note: Because of the above, car parks are not
normally expected to be fitted with sprinklers.
3.5.2.1  Provisions common to all car park
buildings - All materials used in the construction of
the building, compartment or separated part should
be non-combustible, except for:
3.5.2.4 Natural ventilation - Where car parks
are not open sided, each storey should be naturally
ventilated by permanent openings at each level
having an aggregate area not less than 2.5% of the
floor area at that level, of which at least half should
be in two opposing walls.  The number and
disposition of smoke outlets should be such as to
maximise the effectiveness of the ventilation.
(a) any surface finish applied -
(i) to a floor or roof of the car park, or
(ii) within any adjoining building, compartment
or separated part to the structure enclosing
the car park,
Smoke vents at ceiling level may be used as an
alternative to the provision of permanent openings in
the walls. They should have an aggregate area of
permanent opening totalling not less than 2.5% of
the floor area and be arranged to provide a through
draught.
if the finish meets any relevant provisions in B2 and
B4;
100

3.5.2.5
Mechanical ventilation - In some
basement car parks, and enclosed car parks, it may
not be possible to obtain the minimum standard of
natural ventilation openings set out in par. 3.5.2.4
above. In such cases a system of mechanical
ventilation should be provided as follows:
To ensure a satisfactory standard of fire safety in
shopping complexes, alternative measures and
additional compensatory features to those set out in
this document would be appropriate (see 0.2).
While this section is concerned with matters related
to internal fire spread by way of the structure, these
measures will involve consideration of all aspects of
fire safety and their inter-action is particularly critical
in these buildings.
(a) the system should be independent of any other
ventilating system and be designed to operate at
6 air changes per hour for normal petrol vapour
extraction, and at 10 air changes per hour in a
fire condition;
The measures that are relevant to B3 include:
(a) sprinkler protection of all shop units, storage and
service areas, and any parts of malls used for a
purpose that might introduce a fire load into the
mall;
(b) the system should be designed to run in two
parts, each part capable of extracting 50% of the
rates set out in (a) above, and designed so that
each part may operate singly or simultaneously;
(b) construction consisting generally of materials of
limited combustibility except for limited
decorative features and limited amounts of
materials in shop fascias having a lesser standard
of surface spread of flame characteristics than
those for walls in circulation areas (see also B2);
(c) each part of the system should have an
independent power supply which would operate
in the event of failure of the main supply;
(d) outlets for exhaust air should be arranged so
that 50% of the outlets are at high level, and 50%
at low level; and
(c) compartmentation requirements (see 3.2.4.7)
including the following:
(e) the fans should be rated to run at 300°C for a
minimum of 60 mins, and the ductwork and
fixings should be constructed of materials having
a melting point not less than 800°C.
-
walls and floors between shop units
constructed as compartment walls and
compartment floors;
For further information on equipment for removing
hot smoke refer to BS 7346: Part 2 Components for
smoke and heat control systems, Specification for
powered smoke and heat exhaust ventilators.
-
floors in any shop unit exceeding 2000 m2
plan area of largest floor constructed as
compartment floors;
An alternative method of providing smoke
ventilation from enclosed car parks is given in the
BRE Report Design methodologies for smoke and heat
exhaust ventilation (BR 368, 1999).
-
floors in any shop unit opening onto a mall at
more than one level constructed as
compartment floors; and
-
compartmentation also provided between
a large shop unit (over 3700 m2) and a mall,
or between opposing large shop units
(each over 2000 m2) and a mall.  This
compartmentation could be provided by fire
shutters (smaller shop units would normally
not be compartmented from a mall);
Shopping Centres (Purpose Group 4(b))
3.5.3
Whilst the provisions in this Document
about shops should generally be capable of
application in cases where a shop is contained in a
single separate building, complications may arise
where a shop forms part of a shopping centre.  A
shopping centre may include covered malls providing
access to a number of shops and common servicing
areas.  In particular, the provisions about fire
resistance, separating walls, surfaces and boundary
distances may pose problems.
(d) fire resistance periods for loadbearing elements
of structure which are appropriate to the nature
of the occupancies and the overall size of the
building.
101

The above items are not exhaustive but draw
attention to the need to consider proposals for
shopping complexes as a comprehensive fire safety
package.  Guidance on these matters is set out in BS
5588: Part 10: 1991 Code of practice for shopping
complexes.
Buildings Containing an Atrium
3.5.5
Many large modern buildings contain an
atrium, which is a large undivided space within a
building (see 1.0.9 for definition).  Storeys in the
building may be open to the atrium or they may be
separated by fire-resisting construction.  The
provision of an atrium will therefore impact on
compartmentation with the possibility of fire spread
between storeys and as such may need special fire
safety measures.  The accumulation of smoke which
enters the atrium will also impact on the means of
escape provisions (see Section B1).
Guidance on smoke control measures in enclosed
shopping centres is contained in the Building
Research Establishment Report (BR 186) Design
principles for smoke ventilation in enclosed shopping
centres.
Residential (Institutional) Buildings
(Purpose Group 2(a))
Guidance on suitable fire safety measures in these
circumstances is contained in BS 5588 Part 7 “Code
of practice for the incorporation of atria in
buildings”.
3.5.4
In the case of Residential (Institutional)
buildings, consideration is required to the potential
for fire spread between compartments by way of the
external elevations.  This is on account of the nature
of the occupancy and the need to ensure the safety
of occupants who have been evacuated to an
adjoining compartment (see 1.2.7).
Like a shopping centre, the design of a building
containing an atrium may require alternative
approaches to fire safety and the use of fire safety
engineering (see 0.2).  The measures that may be
required will depend on the particular circumstances
and will include consideration of all aspects of fire
safety.  The measures to be provided are likely to
include:
The potential for fire spread by way of unprotected
areas on each side of a compartment wall or
protected stairway should be considered, where
such walls abut an external elevation or are in close
proximity to a re-entrant angle, such as occurs in the
corner of a courtyard or the internal angle where
two elevations meet.
-
sprinkler protection to the building;
-
smoke control measures within the atrium; and
In the case of courtyards, lightwells or wings of the
same building, where opposite elevations are wholly
or partially in different compartments, separation
distances between such opposing elevations should
be considered.
-
facilities to assist fire-fighting within the building;
Further guidance on smoke control measures in
buildings containing an atrium is contained in the
Building Research Establishment Report (BR 258)
Design approaches for smoke control in atrium
buildings.
Guidance on internal fire spread (structure) in
hospitals, including the considerations referred to
above, is contained in Firecode Health Technical
Memorandum 81, Fire Precautions in New Hospitals,
1996 (HTM81: 1996).
Hospitals also contain a number of high hazard
rooms and areas which should be regarded as places
of special fire risk (see 1.0.9).  These include
physiotherapy rooms, occupational therapy rooms,
laundries, large kitchens and laboratories.  Such areas
should be fully separated by means of
compartmentation (see 3.2.4.1).
102

Section B4
External Fire Spread
External fire spread.
B4
The external walls and roof of a building shall be so designed and 
constructed that they afford adequate resistance to the spread of fire to
and from neighbouring buildings.
Performance
The requirements of B4 may be met:
(a) if the external walls are constructed so that the
risk of ignition from an external source, and the
spread of fire over their surfaces, is restricted by
making provision for them to have low rates of
spread of flame, and in some cases low rates of
heat release,
(b) if the amount of unprotected area in the side of
the building is restricted so as to limit the
amount of thermal radiation that can pass
through the wall, taking the distance between the
wall and the boundary into account, and
(c) if the roof is constructed so that the risk of
spread of flame and/or fire penetration from an
external fire source is restricted,
in each case so as to limit the risk of a fire spreading
from the building to a building beyond the boundary,
or vice versa.
The extent to which this is necessary is dependent
on the use of the building, its distance from the
boundary and (in some cases) its height.
103

Contents
Page
4.0
Introduction to provisions
•
Definitions
4.1 Construction of external walls
•
Introduction
106
• Fire resistance standard
•
Portal frames
•
External surfaces
107
4.2 Space separation
•
Introduction
•
Boundaries
•
Notional boundaries
•
Relevant boundaries
•
Unprotected areas and fire
resistance
110
•
Status of combustible surfaces
as unprotected area
•
External walls within 1m of the
relevant boundary
•
External walls 1m or more
from the relevant boundary
•
Material alteration of existing
buildings
114
•
Material change of use of
existing buildings
115
4.3. Roof Coverings
•
Introduction
116
•
Other controls on roofs
•
Classification of performance
•
Separation distances
•
Plastic rooflights
•
Glass in rooflights
104

4.0 Introduction to Provisions
External wall - (or side of a building) includes a
part of a roof pitched at an angle of 70° or more to
the horizontal - if that part of the roof adjoins a
space within the building to which persons have
access (but not access only for repair or
maintenance).
4.0.1
The construction of external walls and the
separation between buildings to prevent external fire
spread are closely related.
The chances of fire spreading across an open space
between buildings, and the consequences if it does,
depend on:
Notional boundary - A boundary presumed to
exist between buildings on the same site (see
Diagram 26).
•
the size and intensity of the fire in the building
concerned;
Relevant boundary - The boundary which the side
of the building faces (see Diagram 25). A notional
boundary can be a relevant boundary.
•
the risk it presents to people in the other
building(s);
Rooflight - Any domelight, lantern light, skylight or
other element intended to admit daylight through a
roof.
•
the distance between the buildings; and
•
the fire protection given by their facing sides
Thermo-plastic material - See Appendix A,
paragraph A15.
Provisions are made in sub-section 4.1 for the fire
resistance of external walls, and to limit the
susceptibility of the external surface of walls to
ignition and to fire spread.
Unprotected area - In relation to a side or
external wall of a building means:
Provisions are made in sub-section 4.2 to limit the
extent of openings and other unprotected areas in
external walls in order to reduce the risk of fire
spread by radiation.
(a) a window, door or other opening; and
(b) any part of the external wall which has less than
the relevant fire resistance set out in Section 4.1;
and
Provisions are made in sub-section 4.3 for reducing
the risk of fire spread between and over roofs.
(c) any part of the external wall which has
combustible material more than 1 mm thick
attached or applied to its external face, whether
for cladding or any other purpose (combustible
material in this context is any material that is not
included in Tables A7 or A8 in Appendix A).
Definitions
4.0.2
The following definitions apply specifically to
B4. Other terms applicable more widely throughout
this Document are given in Appendix D.
Boundary - The boundary of the land belonging to
the building, or where the land abuts a road, railway,
canal or river, the centreline of that road, railway,
canal or river (see Diagram 25).
Class 0 - See Appendix A, paragraph A.11.
Conservatory - A single storey part of a building
where the roof and walls are substantially glazed
with a transparent or translucent material.
105

Provisions meeting the Requirement
4.1
Construction of External
Walls
relevant boundary, then the provisions in par. 4.1.2
require the external wall to be fire-resisting.
It is generally accepted that a portal frame acts as a
single element because of the moment-resisting
connections used, especially the column/rafter joints.
Thus the rafter members of the frame, as well as the
column members may need to be fire protected in
cases where the external wall of the building cannot
be wholly unprotected.
Introduction
4.1.1
Under B3, provisions are made in
sub-section 3.1 for internal and external loadbearing
walls to maintain their loadbearing function in the
event of fire.
Provisions are made in this Section for the external
walls of the building to have sufficient fire resistance
to prevent fire spread across the relevant boundary.
The provisions are closely linked with those for
space separation in sub-section 4.2 which sets out
limits on the amount of wall area that need not be
fire-resisting (termed unprotected area). As the
limits depend on the distance of the wall from the
relevant boundary, it is possible for some, or all, of
the walls to be permitted to have no fire resistance
except for any parts which are loadbearing.
Following an investigation of the behaviour of steel
portal frames in fire, it was considered technically
and economically feasible to design the connection
of the portal frame to the foundation so that it
would transmit the overturning moment caused by
the collapse in a fire of unprotected rafters, purlins
and some roof cladding so as to allow the external
wall to continue to perform its structural function.
The design method is set out in “Single storey steel
framed buildings in fire boundary conditions”,
published by the Steel Construction Institute,
Silwood Park, Ascot, Berks, SL5 7QN, England.
External walls are elements of structure and the
relevant period of fire resistance (which is specified
in Appendix A) depends on the use, height and size
of the building concerned, and whether the wall is
within 1 m of the relevant boundary.
Normally, portal frames of reinforced concrete can
support external walls requiring the same degree of
fire resistance without specific provision at the base
to resist overturning.
Provisions are also made to restrict the amount of
combustible surfaces on buildings that are very close
(less than 1 m) to the relevant boundary and/or on
high buildings. This is in order to reduce the
susceptibility of ignition of the surface from an
external source, and to reduce the possibility of fire
spread up the external face of the building.
Notes:
1.
The recommendations in the SCI publication for
designing the foundation to resist overturning
need not be followed if the building is fitted with
a sprinkler system meeting the relevant
recommendations of BS 5306: Part 2 Fire
extinguishing installations and equipment on
premises, Specification for sprinkler systems, ie the
relevant occupancy rating together with the
additional requirements for life safety.
Fire Resistance Standard
4.1.2
The external walls of the building should
have the appropriate fire resistance given in
Appendix A, Table A1, unless they are permitted to
form an unprotected area under sub-section 4.2.
2.
Normally, portal frames of reinforced concrete
can support external walls requiring a similar
degree of fire resistance without specific
provision at the base to resist overturning.
Portal Frames
4.1.3
Portal frames are often used in single storey
industrial and commercial buildings where there may
be no provisions under B3 for fire resistance of the
structure. Where, however, the building is near a
3.
Existing buildings may have been designed to the
following guidance which is also acceptable:
106

(a) the column members are fixed rigidly to a
base of sufficient size and depth to resist
overturning;
construction should be of limited combustibility (see
Appendix A). This restriction does not apply to
masonry cavity wall construction which complies
with Diagram 17.
(b) there is brick, block or concrete protection to
the columns up to a protected ring beam
providing lateral support; and
Advice on the use of thermal insulation material is
given in the BRE Report Fire performance of
external thermal insulation for walls of multi-storey
buildings (BR 135, 1988).
(c) there is some form of roof venting to give
early heat release. (The roof venting could be,
for example, pvc rooflights covering some 10
per cent of the floor area and evenly spaced
over the floor area.)
External Surfaces
4.1.4
The external surfaces of walls should meet
the provisions in Table 4.1. However, the total
amount of combustible material may be limited in
practice by the provisions for space separation in
sub-section 4.2 (see par. 4.2.6).
Where a mixed use building includes Assembly and
Recreation Purpose Group accommodation, the
external surfaces of walls should meet the provisions
in Table 4.1 (Note 1)
Note: One alternative to meeting the provisions in
Table 4.1 could be BRE Fire Note 9 Assessing the
fire performance of external cladding systems: a test
method (BRE, 1999).
External Wall Construction
4.1.5  The external envelope of a building should not
provide a medium for fire spread. The use of
combustible materials for cladding framework, or of
combustible thermal insulation as an overcladding in
drained and/or ventilated cavities, may present such
a risk in tall buildings, even though the provisions for
external surfaces in Table 4.1 may have been
satisfied.
In the case of the outer cladding of a wall with a
drained and/or ventilated cavity, the surface of the
outer cladding which faces the cavity should also
meet the provisions of Table 4.1
In a building more than 18m high, (see Diagram 37,
Appendix C) insulation material used in drained
and/or ventilated cavities in the external wall
107

Table 4.1
Provision for external surface of walls
Height of building (m)
Distance from any point on the relevant boundary *
Less than 1 m
1 m or more
Less than 18
Class B - s3, d2 (European) or 
No provision (unless it is a 
Class 0 (National)
building described in Note (1))
More than 18
Class B - s3, d2  (European) or
Class B - s3, d2 (European) or
Class 0 (National)
Class 0 (National) (2)
Notes:
*
The relevant boundary might be a notional boundary.
(1) Any part of the wall of a building comprising flats or maisonettes, or a building in the Residential (Institutional), Other Residential,
Assembly and recreation purpose groups, which is 10 m or less above the ground or above a roof or any other part of the building to
which people have access, should be Class C - s3-d2 (European) or have an index of performance (I) not more than 20 (National).
Timber cladding at least 9 mm thick is also acceptable.
(2) Surfaces between 0 and 18 m above the ground may comprise of any material of Class C - s3 - d2 (European) or have an index of
performance (I) not more than 20 (National). Timber cladding at least 9 mm thick is also acceptable.
Index of performance (I) (National) relates to performance under BS 476: Part 6, (see paragraph  A11 of Appendix A).  
For description of Class 0, see paragraph A12 of Appendix A.
108

4.2. Space Separation
A wall should be treated as facing a boundary if it
makes an angle with it of 80° or less (see Diagram
25).
Introduction
Usually only the distance to the boundary of the site
needs to be considered. The meaning of the term
boundary is explained in Diagram 25.
4.2.1
The provisions in this Section limit the
extent of openings and other unprotected areas in
the sides of the building (including areas with a
combustible surface) which will not give adequate
protection against the spread of fire.
Notional Boundaries
The provisions assume:
4.2.3 In some circumstances the distances to
other buildings on the same site needs to be
considered.  This should be done by assuming a
boundary called a notional boundary between those
buildings.
(a) that the size of the fire will depend on the
compartmentation of the building, so that the fire
will involve a complete compartment, but will
not spread across lines of compartmentation;
The concept of a notional boundary between two
buildings on the same site and the rules that apply
are illustrated in Diagram 26.
(b) that the intensity of the fire is related to the use
of the building (i.e. purpose group), but that it
can be moderated by a sprinkler system;
In general, it is not necessary to consider the
separation distance between buildings on the same
site unless one of the buildings, whether new or
existing, is of Residential (Purpose Groups 1(a), 1(b),
1(c), 2(a), 2(b)) or Assembly and Recreation
(Purpose Group 5) use.
(c) that residential and assembly and recreation
purpose groups represent a greater life risk than
other uses;
(d) that the building on the adjoining site has an
identical elevation to the one in question, and is
at the same distance from the common
boundary; and
Where a number of buildings of any purpose group
occupy the same site and where each building is
under different ownership, tenancy or occupancy or
where sub-division of the site is likely to occur, it
would in these circumstances be appropriate to
consider space separation between all buildings on
the same site.
(e) that no significant radiation will pass through any
parts of the external wall that have fire
resistance.
It may sometimes be advantageous to construct
compartments of a smaller size than indicated by B3,
or to provide compartments where none would
otherwise be necessary, in order to reduce the
separation distance (or to increase the amount of
unprotected area in the wall without increasing the
separation distance).
Where buildings of any purpose group occur on the
same site and where space separation has not been
considered, then it is necessary to take into account
the compartmentation requirements under Section
B3 (3.2) as if they were connected together as one
building.
Space separation between opposing elevations of the
same building (see 3.2.5.9) may also need to be
considered.  The principles contained in this Section
are also relevant to these situations.
Boundaries
4.2.2
The use of the distance to a boundary rather
than to another building in measuring the separation
distance makes it possible to calculate the allowable
proportion of unprotected areas, even where
another building does not exist but may do.
Relevant Boundaries
4.2.4
The boundary which a wall faces whether it
is the boundary of the site or a notional boundary is
109

called the relevant boundary (see Diagrams 25 and
26).
(a) If the combustible material is used as a surface
on a wall that has the necessary fire resistance,
then half of the area of combustible material
should be counted as unprotected area.
Unprotected Areas and Fire Resistance
4.2.5
Any part of an external wall which has less
fire resistance than the appropriate amount indicated
in Table A1(5) and Table A2 of Appendix A is
considered to be an unprotected area.
(b) If the combustible material is used as a surface
on a wall that does not have the necessary fire
resistance, then the whole of the area of
combustible material is counted as unprotected
area.
Status of Combustible Surfaces as
Unprotected Area
External Walls Within 1 m of the
Relevant Boundary
4.2.6
Besides the restrictions on combustible
surfaces in 4.1, their extent may also be limited by
the result of the calculation of unprotected area if
they are more than 1 mm in thickness.
4.2.7
A wall situated within 1 m from any point on
the relevant boundary will meet the provisions for
space separation if:
(a) the only unprotected areas are those shown in
Diagram 27, and
Diagram 25  Relevant boundary   Par. 4.0.2
(b) the rest of the wall is fire-resisting from both
sides.
Boundary less than 80º to wall C
External Walls 1 m or more from the
Relevant Boundary
4.2.8
A wall situated at least 1 m from any point
on the relevant boundary will meet the provisions
for space separation if:
Boundary coincides
with wall B
C
Boundary
parallel to
wall D
(a) the extent of unprotected area does not exceed
that given by one of the methods referred to in
4.2.8.1 below, and
Building
B
D
(b) the rest of the wall (if any) is fire-resisting.
A
Boundary parallel to wall A
This boundary may be the centre line
of a road, railway, canal or river.
For a boundary to be relevant it should
1.
coincide with,
2.
be parallel to, or
3.
be at an angle of not more than 80º to the external wall.
110

Diagram 26
Notional boundary
Pars. 4.0.2 and 4.2.3
Site boundary
Notional boundary
Building A
Building B
X
Y
The notional boundary should be set in the area between the two buildings according to the following rules:
1.
These rules only apply when two or more buildings are on the same site and when one of the buildings (new or
existing) is of residential or assembly use.
2.
A notional boundary should be set between a building of a use given in Rule 1 and another building of any use.
3.
An existing building should be taken as if it was a new building of the same use but having the existing unprotected
area and fire-resistance on the outside wall facing the notional boundary.
4.
The notional boundary should be so situated that all buildings comply with the provisions for space separation, having
regard to the amount of unprotected areas.
5.
When set the notional boundary becomes the relevant boundary.
Dimension X :
Compliance with the provisions for space separation in respect of Building A (in accordance with 
pars. 4.2.7 and 4.2.8)
Dimension Y :
Compliance with the provisions for space separation in respect of Building B (in accordance with 
pars. 4.2.7 and 4.2.8)
4.2.8.1
Methods for calculating acceptable
unprotected area
-  Two methods are given in
this Document for calculating the acceptable amount
of unprotected area in an external wall that is at
least 1 m from any point on the relevant boundary
(for walls within 1 m of the boundary see 4.2.7
above).
The methods outlined in the BRE report are based
on the following:
-
enclosing rectangle (geometric method);
-
aggregate notional areas (protractor method);
and
Method 1 (see 4.2.8.4) is only suitable for small
residential buildings which do not belong to Purpose
Group 2(a), Residential (Institutional).
-
a calculation method (Part 2 of BRE Report)
The calculation method, which takes into account a
number of fire parameters, including fire-load
densities and ventilation conditions, may be the most
appropriate in certain critical situations.  Fire load
densities may be determined by consideration of the
intended use of the building, including any likely
variations in fire load with time.
Method 2 (see 4.2.8.5) may be used for buildings or
compartments for which Method 1 is not
appropriate.
Other methods are described in the Building
Research Establishment Report (BR 187) "External
fire spread: building separation and boundary
distances".
111

Diagram 27
Unprotected areas which may be disregarded for 
Par. 4.2.7  
space separation purposes
Protected stairway
Compartment wall
PLAN
Line of compartment wall
1.5 m min
1.5 m min
4 m min
1.5 m min
1.5 m min
1.5 m min
4 m min
4 m min
Line of 
compartment 
floor
4 m min
4 m min
1.5 m min
1.5 m min
ELEVATION
KEY
Unprotected area of 0.1m  maximum
2
Unprotected area of 0.1m  maximum; or group of unprotected areas within an area of 1m x 1m
2
Unprotected area of external wall to protected stairway
NOTES:
(a)
The unprotected area of the enclosure to a protected stairway may be disregarded for the purpose of 
space separation.
(b)
There are restrictions in section B1 (see 1.3.6.6 and Diagram 7) on the unprotected areas of external 
enclosures to a building adjacent to any unprotected area in the enclosure to a protected stairway.
(c)
There are also restrictions in section B1 (see 1.3.9 and Diagram 8) on unprotected areas adjacent to 
external escape stairways.
Dimensions shown are minimum separation distances between unprotected areas of limited size if those areas are
to be disregarded for space separation purposes.
112

4.2.8.2
Basis for calculating acceptable
unprotected area - The basis of methods 1 and 2
is set out in Fire Research Technical Paper No. 5
(1963). This has been reprinted as part of the BRE
Report referred to in 4.2.8.1 above. The aim is to
ensure that the building is separated from the
boundary by at least half the distance at which the
total thermal radiation intensity emitted from all
unprotected areas in the wall would be 12.6 kW/m2
(in still air) assuming the radiation intensity at each
unprotected area is:
2.
Each side of the building will meet the provisions
for space separation if:
(a) the distance of the side of the building from
the relevant boundary, and
(b) the extent of unprotected area,
are within the limits given in Table 4.2.
Note:
In calculating the maximum permitted
unprotected area, any areas shown in Diagram 27
can be disregarded.
(a) 84 kW/m2, if the building is in the residential,
office or assembly or Recreation purpose groups,
and
3.
Any parts of the side of the building in excess of
the maximum permitted unprotected area should
be fire-resisting.
(b) 168 kW/m2, if the building is in the shop,
commercial, industrial, storage or other non-
residential purpose groups.
Diagram 28
Small residential    Par. 4.2.8.4 
building
4.2.8.3 Sprinkler systems - It may be assumed
that the intensity of radiation from a fire in a
compartment which is fitted throughout with a
sprinkler system will be half the values given in
4.2.8.2 (a) and (b) above. The sprinkler system
should meet the relevant recommendations of BS
5306: Part 2: 1990, i.e. the relevant occupancy rating
together with the additional requirements for life
safety.
24 m maximum
Area in Table 4.2 is the 
total unprotected area
to be contained in the 
walls facing the relevant
boundary (could be a 
notional boundary)
In the case of a building containing one or more
atria, the recommendations of clause 28.2 in BS
5588: Part 7 “Code of practice for incorporation of
atria in buildings” should be followed.
Minimum
distance A
in Table 4.2
Boundary
4.2.8.4 Method 1 - small residential buildings
- This method applies only to a building intended to
be used as a dwelling house, or for flats or other
residential purposes (not Institutional), which is not
less than 1 m from any point on the relevant
boundary.
Table 4.2 Permitted unprotected areas in
small residential buildings
Minimum distance (A) 
Maximum total area 
between side of 
of unprotected areas
building and relevant 
(m2)
boundary(m)
The following rules for determining the maximum
permitted unprotected area should be read with
Diagram 28 and Table 4.2:
1.
The building should not exceed 3 storeys in
height (basements not counted) or be more than
24 m in length.
1.0
5.6
2.0
12
3.0
18
4.0
24
5.0
30
6.0
no limit
113

4.2.8.5
Method 2 - Other buildings or
compartments - This method applies to a building
or compartment intended for any use and not less
than 1 m from any point on the relevant boundary.
The following rules for determining the maximum
permitted unprotected area should be read with
Table 4.3.
Note:
In calculating the maximum permitted
unprotected area, any areas shown in Diagram
27 can be disregarded.
(3) Any parts of the side of the building in excess of
the maximum permitted unprotected area should
be fire-resisting.
(1) Except for open sided car parks in Purpose
Group 7(b), the building or compartment should
not exceed 10 m in height.
Material Alteration of Existing Buildings
4.2.9
In the case of a material alteration of an
existing building, the requirements in relation to
space separation may be met where:
Note:
For any building or compartment more
than 10 m in height, the methods set out in the
BRE Report 'Building separation and boundary
distances' can be applied.
-
there is no increase in the extent of un-
protected areas to the existing external walls of
the building; and
(2) Each side of the building will meet the provisions
for space separation if:
-
the building is not altered or extended by the
provision of additional floor area(s).
(a) the distance of the side of the building from
the relevant boundary, and
(b) the extent of unprotected area,
are within the limits of unprotected area.
Table 4.3
Permitted unprotected areas in small buildings or compartments
Minimum distance between side of building and relevant boundary(m)
Maximum total per cent 
of unprotected areas (%)
Purpose Groups
Residential, Office, 
Shop, Shopping Centre 
Assembly and Recreation
Industrial, Storage & 
(Purpose Groups 1(a), 1(b), 
other Non-residential
1(c), 2(a), 2(b), 3 and 5)
(Purpose Group 4, 4(a), 
6, 7 and 8)
0
0
0
2.5
5
20
5.0
10
40
7.5
15
60
10.0
20
80
12.5
25
100
Notes
•
Intermediate values may be obtained by interpolation.
•
For buildings which are fitted throughout with an appropriate automatic sprinkler system meeting the relevant recommendations of BS
5306: Part 2: 1990 Fire extinguishing installations and equipment on premises, Part 2, Specification for sprinkler systems, i.e. the relevant
occupancy rating together with additional requirements for life safety, the values in columns (1) and (2) may be halved.
•
In the case of open sided car parks in Purpose Group 7(b) the distances set out in column (1) may be used instead of those in column
(2).
114

Material Change of Use of Existing
Buildings
4.2.10 In the case of a material change of use of an
existing building the requirements in relation to
space separation may be met where:
-
there is no increase in the extent of
un-protected areas to the existing external walls
of the building; and
-
the building is not altered or extended by the
provision of additional floor area(s); and
-
the new use will not result in an increased fire
load density (i.e. the amount of combustible
materials from contents and the construction,
per unit floor area) in any part of the building.
Where any of the above criteria are not met, it will
be necessary to demonstrate that the unprotected
areas comply with the requirements outlined at 4.2.7
and 4.2.8.
Where it is necessary to increase the extent of
unprotected areas of a wall on an existing elevation,
it may be appropriate to employ insulated fire-
resisting glazing in fixed frames or provide other fire
resisting construction remote from any existing
openings, to provide the necessary insulation
protection.
115

4.3. Roof Coverings
In addition, roof covering products (and/or
materials) as defined in Commission Decision
2000/553/EC of 6th September 2000 implementing
Council Directive 89/106/EEC as regards the
external fire performance of roof coverings can be
considered to fulfil all of the requirements for
performance characteristic “external fire
performance” without the need for testing provided
that any national provisions on the design and
execution of works are fulfilled. That is, the roof
covering products (and/or materials) defined in this
Commission Decision can be used without
restriction.
Introduction
4.3.1
The provisions in this sub-section limit the
proximity to the boundary of those types of roof
covering which will not give adequate protection
against the spread of fire.
Other Controls on Roofs
4.3.2
There are provisions concerning the fire
properties of roofs elsewhere. In B3, there are
provisions in sub-section 3.2 for roofs that pass over
the top of a compartment wall or separating wall. In
B2, there are provisions for the internal surfaces of
rooflights as part of the internal lining of a room or
circulation space.
Plastic Rooflights
4.3.5
Table 4.5 sets out the limitations on the use
of plastic rooflights which do not meet the basic
provisions described in Table 4.4 but which have a
lower surface of thermoplastic material with a TP(a)
rigid or TP(b) classification (see A14 of Appendix A).
Classification of Performance
4.3.3
The performance of roof coverings is
determined in accordance with I.S. EN 13501-5:
xxxx, Fire classification of construction products and
building elements, Part 5 – Classification using test
data from external fire exposure to roof tests or is
designated by reference to the test methods
specified in BS 476: part 3: 2004, as described in
Appendix A. The notional performance of some
common roof coverings is given in table A5 of
Appendix A.
When used in rooflights, a rigid thermoplastic sheet
product made from polycarbonate or from
unplasticised PVC, which achieves a class C – s3, d2
(European class) or class 1 (National class) rating for
surface spread of flame when tested to BS 476 part
7: 1971 or 1987, can be regarded as having
BROOF(t4) (European class) or an AA (National
class) designation.
Glass in Rooflights
I.S. ENV 1187: 2002 also refers.
4.3.6 When used in rooflights, unwired glass at
least 4 mm thick can be regarded as having
BROOF(t4) (European class) or an AA (National
class) designation. Thinner glass should only be used
where the separation distance is 6 m or more, unless
the glass is over one of the following:
Rooflights are controlled on a similar basis, although
there is a different method of classification for plastic
rooflights.
Separation Distances
(a) a balcony, verandah, open carport, covered way,
loading bay or detached swimming pool; or
4.3.4
The separation distance is the minimum
distance from the roof (or part of the roof) in
question to the nearest boundary, which may be a
notional boundary.
(b) a garage, conservatory or outbuilding, with a
maximum floor area of 40 m2.
Table 4.4 sets out separation distances according to
the type of roof covering and the size and use of the
building. However, there are no restrictions on the
use of roof coverings designated class BROOF(t4)
(European class) or AA, AB or AC (National class).
Important note: The year designation of xxxx is used
for pending European standards that are not yet
published.
116

Table 4.4
Limitations on roof coverings*
Designation of covering of 
Minimum distance from any point on relevant boundary
roof, or part of roof
European 
National
Less than 
At least 
At least 
At least
Class
Class
6 m
6 m
12 m
20 m
BROOF(t4)
AA, AB or AC
✓
✓
✓
✓
CROOF(t4)
BA, BB or BC
✗
✓
✓
✓
DROOF(t4) 
CA, CB or CC
✗
✓(1)
✓(2)
✓
EROOF(t4) 
AD, BD or CD
✗
✓(1)
✓(2)
✓(2)
FROOF(t4)
DA, DB, DC or DD
✗
✗
✗
✓(1)
thatch or wood shingles (3)
✗
✓(1)
✓(2)
✓(2)
Notes:
*
See par. 4.3.6 for limitation on glass and Table 4.5 for limitation on plastic rooflights.
✓
-
Acceptable
✗
-
Not acceptable
✓(1)
Not acceptable on any building listed below:
(a) houses in terraces of three or more houses;
(b) industrial, storage or other non-residential purpose group buildings of any size; and
(c) any other buildings with a cubic capacity of more than 1500 m3.
and only acceptable on other buildings if the part of the roof is no more than 3 m2 area and is at least 1.5 m from any similar
part, with the roof between the parts covered with a material of limited combustibility.
✓(2)
Not acceptable on any of the buildings listed at (a), (b) or (c) in (1) above.
(3)
Where the performance under BS 476: Part 3: 1958 cannot be established..
Table 4.5
Limitations on plastic rooflights
Classification on
Space which rooflight 
Minimum distance from any point on relevant boundary 
lower surface(1)
can serve
to rooflight with an external surface classification(2) of:
TP(a)
TP(b)
FROOF(t4)(European Class) or
DA DB DC DD (National Class)
1. TP(a) rigid
any space except a protected 
stairway
6 m(3)
6 m(5)
20 m
2. TP(b)
(a) balcony, verandah, carport,
6 m
6 m
20 m
covered way or loading bay, which
has at least one longer side wholly
or permanently open
(b) detached swimming pool
(c) conservatory, garage or
outbuilding, with a maximum floor
area of 40 m2
(d) circulation space(4) (except a
protected stairway)
6 m(5)
6 m(5)
20 m(5)
(e) room(4)
Notes:
(1)
See also the guidance to B2.
(2)
The classification of external roof surfaces is explained in Appendix A.
(3)
No limit in the case of any space described in 2a, b and c.
(4)
Single skin rooflight only, in the case of non-thermoplastic material.
(5)
The rooflight should also meet the provisions of Diagram 29.
None of the above designations are suitable for protected stairways - (see 2.3.3).
Products may have upper and lower surfaces with different properties if they have double skins or are laminates of different materials.
117

Diagram 29
Limits on spacing and size of plastic rooflights 
Table 4.5  
having a TP(b) lower surface
3 m min
3 m min
3 m min in any direction
3 m min
Rooflight 
max area 5 m2
Rooflight 
max area 5 m2
3 m min
KEY 
Rooflight or group of rooflights not exceeding 5 m2
Roof covering to be a material of limited combustibility
118

Section B5
Access and Facilities for the Fire Service
Access and facilities for
B5
A building shall be so designed and constructed that  there is adequate 
the fire service.
provision for access for fire appliances and for such other facilities as 
may be reasonably required to assist the fire service in the protection of
life and property.
Performance
The requirement of B5 may be met:
(a) if there is sufficient means of external access to
enable fire appliances to be brought near to the
building for effective use;
(b) if there is sufficient means of access into, and
within, the building for fire-fighting personnel to
effect rescue and fight fire; and
(c) if the building is provided with sufficient fire
mains and other facilities to assist firefighters in
their tasks;
all to an extent dependent on the use and size of the
building.
119

Contents
Page
5.0 
Introduction to provisions
•
Scope
121
•
Factors determining facilities
appropriate to a specific building
•
Existing buildings
121
• Definitions
5.1 
Fire
mains
•
Introduction
123
•
Provision of internal fire mains
•
Number and location of
internal fire mains
•
Design and construction of
internal fire mains
•
Sources of water for firefighting
•
Provision of hydrants
124
• External fire mains
125
5.2
Vehicle access
•
Introduction
126
•
Provision of vehicle access
•
Existing buildings
•
Design of access routes
127
and hardstandings
5.3 
Personnel
access
•
Introduction
130
•
Provision of firefighting shafts
•
Number and location of
firefighting shafts
•
Design and construction of
firefighting shafts
131
5.4
Areas requiring special 
consideration
•
Boiler rooms and fuel stores
132
•
High voltage discharge lighting
•
Ventilation of heat and smoke
133
120

5.0    Introduction to Provisions
outside or inside the building.  The following
considerations will determine the extent of the
facilities required for any particular situation:
Scope
(a) In many instances fire fighting is carried out
within the building.  In deep basements and tall
buildings fire fighters will invariably work inside.
They need special access facilities (see
sub-section 5.3), equipped with fire mains, as
described in sub-section 5.1.  Fire appliances
need access to entry points near the fire mains,
as described in sub-section 5.2.
5.0.1
While the fire safety objectives of Part B
relate principally to the protection of life from fire
(see 0.3.8), Section B5 relates to measures intended
to assist the fire services in the protection of life and
property from fire.
Fire authorities have functions under the Fire
Services Act, 1981 to provide fire brigades for the
extinguishment of fires and for the protection and
rescue of persons and property from injury by fire.
Regulation B5 provides for the provision of access
and other facilities to assist the fire service in the
protection of life and property from fire.
(b) In other buildings the combination of personnel
access facilities offered by the normal means of
escape, and the ability to work from ladders and
appliances on the perimeter is sufficient without
special internal arrangements.  Depending on the
size of the building, vehicle access may be needed
to some or all of the perimeter, as explained in
sub-section 5.2.
The guidance in this Section relates to the provision
of facilities for the fire service within and around
buildings for the purpose of protecting life and
mitigating property damage due to fire.
(c) Access for personnel to basement areas may in
particular present difficulties, as the products of
combustion from a fire tend to escape by way of
the stairways.  This problem can be reduced by
the provision of ventilation.  Ventilation may also
be appropriate in other situations, particularly
from large spaces within buildings.  Venting can
improve visibility and reduce temperatures, thus
assisting search, rescue and fire fighting.
Guidance on ventilation for fire fighting is
indicated in 5.4.3.
To assist the fire service some or all of the following
facilities may be necessary, depending mainly on the
size of the building:
•
vehicle access to the building for fire appliances;
•
access to and within the building for fire fighting
personnel;
•
fire mains around and within buildings, including
the provision of hydrants;
(d) Water is the normal extinguishing medium for
fire within buildings.  Water is obtained in the
first instance from the supplies carried on the
first responding fire appliances. This is
supplemented with water from public mains or
fire mains on the site, where available, or
pumped from other adjacent sources such as
rivers, canals, ponds or static storage tanks,
where provided.  Water may also be ferried by
water-carrying tankers or relayed by pumping
from remote sources.  Guidance on the
provision of fire mains is given in sub-section 5.1.
•
provisions for venting of heat and smoke from
basement areas and other spaces;
•
other facilities such as foam inlets to basement
boiler-houses and fuel storage and electrical
isolation switches.
Factors 
Determining 
Facilities
Appropriate to a Specific Building
5.0.2
The main factor determining the facilities
needed to assist the fire service is the size of the
building.
(e) Certain areas, such as boiler rooms and fuel
storage areas within buildings require special
provisions, such as facilities for pumping foam
extinguishing medium from outside.  Other
The facilities provided also depend on the expected
method of fire fighting; whether this will be from
121

facilities may be required to isolate electrical
supplies, particularly in the case of high voltage
installations.  Guidance on these special
provisions is contained in sub-section 5.4.
Firefighting stairway: a protected stairway
communicating with the accommodation area only
through a firefighting lobby.
Fire mains: pipes installed in and around buildings
and equipped so that the fire service may connect
hoses to receive a supply of water for fire fighting.
Existing Buildings
5.0.3
In the case of a material alteration of an
existing building, the requirements of B5 of the
Second Schedule to the Building Regulations may be
met:
Hydrant: an assembly comprising a valve and outlet
connection from an external fire mains, provided to
deliver a supply of water for fire-fighting.
(i)
if the access and facilities for the fire service are
not altered in such a way as to reduce the
extent or performance of those that existed
before the material alteration; and
Perimeter (of buildings): The maximum aggregate
plan perimeter, formed by vertical projection onto a
horizontal plane but excluding any parts which are
connected to adjoining buildings (see Diagram 31).
(ii)
if the building is not extended or altered by the
addition of floor area at any level or the subject
of a material change of use.
In the case of a material change of use of a building,
it will be necessary to assess the access and facilities
for the fire services in accordance with the guidance
of the relevant sub-section to this Section.
However, in relation to vehicle access, special
provisions are made for existing buildings (see 5.2.3).
It may also be prudent to seek advice from the
relevant fire authority in relation to such matters.
Definitions
5.0.4
The following definitions apply specifically to
B5.  Other terms applicable more widely throughout
this Document are given in Appendix D.
Firefighting lift: a lift designed to have additional
protection, with controls that enable it to be used
under the direct control of the fire brigade in fighting
a fire.
Firefighting lobby: a protected lobby for providing
access from a firefighting stairway to the
accommodation area and to any associated
firefighting lift.
Firefighting shaft: a protected shaft containing a
firefighting stairway, firefighting lobbies and, if
provided, a firefighting lift.
122

5.1. Fire Mains
Number and Location of Internal Fire
Mains
Introduction
5.1.3
Where internal fire mains are installed, they
should be positioned so that at each level other than
ground level there is one main for every firefighting
shaft provided to meet the provisions in paragraph
5.3.3.
5.1.1
Fire mains are pipes installed in and around a
building and equipped so that the fire service may
connect hoses to receive a supply of water to fight
fires.  Fire mains are divided into two types as
follows:
If there are no firefighting shafts but internal fire
mains are to be installed, the criteria in par. 5.3.3 for
the number and location of firefighting shafts may be
used to determine the provision of internal fire
mains, even though the building may not have a
storey at more than 20 m above ground level.
-
internal fire mains (see 5.1.2); and
-
external fire mains and hydrants (see 5.1.7,
5.1.8).
Provision of Internal Fire Mains
5.1.4
The outlets from internal fire mains should
be sited in:
5.1.2
Internal fire mains may be of two types:
(a) a firefighting shaft (see sub-section 5.3), or
-
rising mains, serving floors above ground or
access level; or
(b) a protected stairway, or
-
falling mains serving levels below ground or
access level.
(c) a balcony or walkway in the open air.
Design and Construction of Internal Fire
Mains
Internal fire mains may also be of the "dry" type
which are normally empty and are supplied through
hose from a fire service pumping appliance, or they
may be of the "wet" type kept full of water and
supplied from tanks and pumps in the building.
5.1.5
The design and construction of internal fire
mains should be in accordance with the relevant
sections of BS 5306: Part 1: 1988 (excluding clause
6).
Internal fire mains should be provided in all buildings
where a firefighting shaft is also required (see 5.3).
The following provisions are required for the
situations as described:
Sources of Water for Firefighting
5.1.6
Water for firefighting is available by way of a
number of possible sources as follows:
(a) in buildings with a floor at more than 20 m
above ground level, storeys above ground level
should be equipped with wet or dry rising fire
mains;
(a) Water carried on fire appliances (water tenders,
water tankers, etc.);
(b) in buildings with a basement at more than 10 m
below ground level, basement storeys should be
equipped with wet or dry fire mains;
(b) Hydrants on external fire mains;
(c) Static storage tanks or reservoirs where
provided;
(c) in buildings with any floor at more than 60 m
above ground level, storeys above ground level
should be equipped with wet rising fire mains.
(d) Other sources such as rivers, canals, ponds, etc.,
where adequate access for pumping is available.
123

Provision of Hydrants
Fire hydrants should be located as shown in Diagram
30 and such that:
5.1.7
The following buildings should be provided
with one or more external fire hydrants, complying
with the requirements of BS 750: 1984 Specification
for underground fire hydrants and surface box
frames and covers, and with any specific
requirements of the relevant fire authority:
-
the distance from the building is not  less than 6
m or more than 46 m;
-
the distance from a hydrant to a vehicle access
roadway or hard-standing area for fire appliances
(see 5.2) is not more than 30 m;
-
every building provided with an internal fire
main, wet or dry;
-
they are distributed around the perimeter of the
building, having regard to the provision of access
for fire appliances (see 5.2): and
-
every building having a floor area on any storey
of more than 1000 m2;
-
the hydrants are located on the same site as the
building or are provided by a sanitary authority
on a public roadway adjacent to the site.
For buildings, or groups of buildings, exceeding
1000 m2 in ground floor area, at least one hydrant
should be provided for every 1000 m2 of the area
covered at ground level.
A hydrant situated inside a building may also be
acceptable where it is:
Diagram 30
External fire mains and hydrants
Par. 5.1.7
S i t e  b o u n d a r y
Fire main
H
30 m max
Building
46 m max
H
6 m min
H
46 m max
30 m max
Access
H
P u b l i c  r o a d w a y
Water main
Water main (public)
NOTES
Fire main 
Refer to par. 5.1.8 for external mains.
H
Hydrant 
Refer to par. 5.1.7 for provision of hydrants.
Hardstanding 
Refer to par. 5.2.2 for provision of vehicle access.
124

-
in a separate fire compartment i.e. separated
from the rest of the building by compartment
walls;
-
not more than 4.5 m and visible from an
entrance to the building; and
-
indicated by a suitable notice at the entrance.
All hydrants should be conspicuously marked in
accordance with BS 3251: 1976 Specification of
indicator plates for fire hydrants and emergency
water supplies.
External Fire Mains
5.1.8
Most urban areas are supplied with water
through public water mains.  Where such mains are
provided it is normal to have hydrants provided for
the fire brigade to obtain a ready supply of water for
firefighting.  The siting of these hydrants is important
both from the point of view of accessibility for fire
brigade use and proximity to buildings for quick and
effective firefighting (see 5.1.7).
The provision of water mains, and suitably located
hydrants outside of the site of a building does not
come within the scope of the Building Regulations.
In many cases, especially for smaller developments in
urban areas, hydrants on public water mains will be
adequate.  However, for larger buildings, the
hydrants available from the public mains outside of
the site may not be sufficient for firefighting.  In these
situations, hydrants on external fire mains within the
site of the building will provide the most convenient
source of water.  This source may be supplemented
by hydrants on public mains or other sources
indicated at 5.1.6.
Where required to provide hydrants in accordance
with 5.1.7, fire mains should be designed to be
capable of providing satisfactory flows and pressures.
Guidance for the design of hydrant systems is
contained in BS 5306: Part 1: 1976.  For improved
and more reliable supplies, external fire mains on a
site should preferably be installed as part of a ring
main system.
125

5.2. Vehicle Access
available to provide access is less than for a free-
standing building.  Where there are adjoining
buildings on more than two sides, the access
requirement derived from Table 5.1 may not
therefore be adequate.  In these situations it may be
appropriate to consult with the relevant fire
authority in relation to access and other facilities or
compensating features as are considered necessary.
Introduction
5.2.1
Fire brigade vehicle access to the exterior of
a building is required to enable high reach appliances,
such as turntable ladders and hydraulic platforms, to
be deployed, and to enable pumping appliances to
supply water and equipment for firefighting.
In the provision of access for fire appliances,
consideration should also be given to the position of
any hydrants required by reason of the criteria
outlined in 5.1.
Access requirements increase with building size and
height and also depend on whether the building is
fitted with internal fire mains (see 5.1).
Existing Buildings
Access for fire appliances should be provided in
accordance with the provisions outlined in 5.2.2
below.
5.2.3
In the case of existing buildings, where
access for fire appliances is not in accordance with
the provisions outlined at 5.2.2, it is appropriate to
consider a range of compensating measures,
depending on the circumstances of each particular
case.  Such measures could include additional
personnel access (see 5.3) to the building for
firefighting, additional internal fire mains (see 5.1)
and other facilities to assist firefighting.
Vehicle access routes and hard-standings should
meet the criteria described in 5.2.4 if they are to be
used by fire service vehicles.
Provision of Vehicle Access
5.2.2
For effective firefighting operations, fire
brigade appliances should be able to get within easy
reach of a building.  For small buildings it is generally
only necessary to have access to one external
elevation, but larger buildings will require access to
all or a number of elevations.
In the case of an existing small building, with a total
floor area of up to 1000 m2 where the height of the
top storey is under 10 m, access for fire service
pump appliances should generally be provided to
within 45 m of the principal entrance to the building.
Vehicle access should be provided in accordance
with the criteria indicated in Table 5.1.  Any
elevation to which vehicle access is provided in
accordance with Table 5.1 should contain a door
giving access to the interior of the building.
In large or complex buildings it will be necessary to
provide access to within a reasonable distance of a
number of points on the exterior and to within a
reasonable distance of other entry points to the
building.  In these cases it may be appropriate to
consult with the relevant fire authority in this regard.
In the case of a building fitted with a dry internal fire
main, access for a pump appliance should be
provided to within 18 m and within sight of the inlet
connection point.
In the case of a building fitted with a wet internal fire
main, access for a pump appliance should be
provided to within 18 m and within sight of an
entrance giving access to the main and within sight of
the inlet connection to the suction tank for the main.
In the case of a building which has adjoining buildings
on one or more sides, the perimeter (see 5.0.4 and
Diagram 31 for the definition of ‘perimeter’) which is
126

Table 5.1
Vehicle access to buildings
Volume of building
Height of top storey 
Provide vehicle access
Type of appliance
(m3)
above ground
(m)
up to 7,000
under 10
at rate of 2.4 m in length for 
pump
every  90 m2 of ground floor area
over 10
to 15% of perimeter
high reach
7,000-28,000
up to 10
to 15% of perimeter
pump
over 10
to 50% of perimeter
high reach
28,500-56,000
up to 10
to 50% of perimeter
pump 
over 10
to 50% of perimeter
high reach
56,000-85,000
up to 10
to 75% of perimeter
pump
over 10
to 75% of perimeter
high reach
over 85,000
up to 10
to 100% of perimeter
pump
over 10
to 100% of perimeter
high reach
Note:  See 5.0.4 and Diagram 31 for the definition of 'perimeter'.
Design of Access Routes and Hard-
standings
Where access is provided to an elevation in
accordance with Table 5.2, overhead obstructions
such as overhead cables that would interfere with
the setting of ladders etc., should be avoided in the
area shown on Diagram 32.
5.2.4
A vehicle access route may be a public or
private road, or other route, which, including any
manhole or other covers, meets the standards in
Table 5.2, Diagram 32 and the following paragraphs.
Where access roadways are provided within the site
of a building, turning facilities for appliances, in
accordance with the requirements of Table 5.2
should be provided in any dead-end access route
that is more than 20 m long.
Access routes to buildings with any storey at more
than 10 m above ground level should meet the
standards for high reach appliances. For lower
buildings the access should be to the standards for
pumping appliances.
Table 5.2
Vehicle access route specifications
Appliance
Minimum 
Minimum width
Minimum
Minimum
Minimum 
Minimum
type
width of 
of gateways  
turning circle 
turning circle 
clearance 
carrying 
road between 
between 
between kerbs
between walls
height
capacity
kerbs (m)
kerbs (m)
(m)
(m)
(m)
(tonnes)
Pump
3.7
3.1
16.8
19.2
3.7
12.5
High Reach
3.7
3.1
26
29
4
16.25
Note:
Use of these figures will cater for nearly all of the fire appliances in use at present. Some fire authorities use different sized appliances and it
is therefore advisable that the relevant fire authority be consulted.
127

Diagram 31
Building perimeter
Table 5.1
Perimeter
Adjoining building
Adjoining building
Building
Perimeter
APPLICATION TO TERRACE BUILDING
1.    Perimeter excludes separating walls.
Vertical projection
Perimeter
Horizontal ground plane
APPLICATION TO FREESTANDING BUILDING
2.    Perimeter is the maximum aggregate plan perimeter found by vertical projection onto a horizontal ground plane.
128

Diagram 32
Fire appliance (high reach) access to buildings
Par. 5.2.4
Any overhead obstructions to be avoided in this zone
A
B
C
D
Obstruction
Hardstanding
SECTION
Face of building at ground level or vertical
plane of furthest projecting upper storey
DIMENSION
TYPE OF APPLIANCE
Hydraulic platform
Turntable ladder
A
Max distance of hardstanding from building
4.9 m
2.0 m
B
Minimum width of hardstanding
5.0 m
5.5 m
C
Minimum distance of further edge of hardstanding
10 m
7.5 m
D
Minimum width of unobstructed space for swing of hydraulic platform
n/a
2.2 m
NOTE
Hardstanding for high reach appliances should be as level as possible and should not exceed a gradient of 1 in 12.
129

5.3. Personnel 
Access 
to
Buildings for Firefighting
10 m below ground level, should be provided with
firefighting shafts containing firefighting lifts.
Every firefighting stairway and firefighting lift should 
be  approached  through  a  firefighting  lobby  (see 
Diagram  33).
Introduction
5.3.1
In low rise buildings without deep basements
fire service personnel access requirements may be
met by a combination of the normal means of
escape, and the measures for vehicle access in
sub-section 5.2, which facilitate ladder access to
upper storeys. In other buildings the problems of
reaching the fire, and working inside near the fire,
merit the provision of additional facilities to avoid
delay and to provide a sufficiently secure operating
base to allow effective action to be taken.
In  a  building  containing  flats  (Purpose  Group  1(c)) 
(see 1.1.2),  a  firefighting  lobby  should  be  provided.  
There  should  not  be  direct  access  to  a  flat  or 
ancillary  accommodation  from  a  firefighting  lobby.  
The  firefighting  lobby  facilitates ongoing evacuation
of
 occupants,
 and
 concurrent  firefighting 
operations.
A firefighting stairway should serve every storey of
the building.
These additional facilities include firefighting lifts,
firefighting stairways and firefighting lobbies, which
are combined in a protected shaft known as the
firefighting shaft (Diagram 33).
A firefighting lift should serve every storey above
ground, including the ground floor, in a building with
any floor 20 m or more above ground. However a
firefighting lift need not serve a storey in a building
used as flats (purpose group 1(c)) on which there is
no entrance to a dwelling. A firefighting lift should
also serve every storey below ground, and the
ground floor, in a building with a basement at more
than 10 m below ground.
Provisions for protected shafts in general are given in
Section B3.
Number and Location of Firefighting
Shafts
Firemain
5.3.3
The number of firefighting shafts should:
(a) (if the building is fitted throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system meeting the relevant
recommendations of BS 5306: Part 2) comply
with Table 5.3; or
(b) (if the building is not fitted with sprinklers) be
such that there is at least one for every 900 m2
(or part thereof) of floor area of the largest floor
that is more than 20 m above ground level.
Design and construction of the three required 
elements of a firefighting shaft (firefighting stairway, 
firefighting lift, and firefighting lobby with firemain) in
respect of the particulars referenced in 5.3.4 should
be in accordance with BS 5588 Part 5: 2004.
The location of firefighting shafts should be such that
every part of every storey, other than fire service
access level, is no more than 60 m from the entrance
to a firefighting lobby, measured on a route suitable
for laying hose. If the internal layout is unknown at
the design stage, then every part of every such
storey should be no more than 40 m in a direct line
from the entrance to a firefighting lobby.
Provision of Firefighting Shafts
5.3.2
Buildings with a floor at more than 20 m
above ground level or with a basement at more than
130

Firefighting shaft walls should be of robust
construction so that their fire resistance is unlikely
to be impaired by mechanical damage.
Table 5.3
Minimum number of
firefighting shafts in buildings
fitted with sprinklers
Floor area of the
Minimum number of
largest storey over 
firefighting shafts
20 m above 
ground level
(sq. m)
less than 900
1
900 to 2000 
2
2001 to 3500
3
over 3500
1 for every 1500 m2 of
floor area, or part thereof
Design and Construction of Firefighting
Shafts
5.3.4
All firefighting shafts should be equipped with
internal fire mains having outlet connections and
valves in every firefighting lobby except at access
level.
Firefighting shafts should be designed  and installed in
accordance with the recommendations of BS 5588:
Part  5:  2004  Code  of  practice  for  fire-fighting 
stairs and lifts in respect of the following:
-
planning within the firefighting shaft
-
fire mains and landing valves
-
smoke control
-
fire resistance
-
fire doors
-
glazed areas
-
firefighting lift installation
-
electrical supply
-
fire brigade communications system
131

5.4 Areas Requiring Special
Consideration
The discharge of foam should be so arranged to
impinge on a wall approximately 900 mm above the
floor level of the room or 150 mm above the
catchpit level, whichever is the higher.
There are a number of situations which pose
particular difficulties and where additional facilities
should be provided to assist the fire brigades.
High Voltage Discharge Lighting
Boiler Rooms and Fuel Stores
5.4.2
Where high voltage discharge lighting is used
inside or outside buildings, fire brigade personnel
could be in considerable danger during fire fighting
operations. It is therefore necessary to provide a
switch, readily accessible to fire fighters, which will
enable them to turn off and isolate this high voltage
lighting before commencing fire fighting.
5.4.1
In buildings where the heating installation is
oil-fuelled, and in particular where the oil storage
tanks and oil burning equipment are situated below
ground level, a fire involving the fuel and equipment
can be tackled by the fire brigade using foam,
introduced into the heating or storage chamber
through foam inlets.
5.4.2.1 Provision of switches - One or more
switches should be provided to enable the fire
brigade personnel to switch off the discharge lighting
in the event of a fire. Such switches are needed
where exterior discharge lighting (e.g. advertising
signs) and/or interior discharge lighting systems are
provided. The switches should be readily accessible
and conspicuously marked to enable fire fighters to
switch them off without delay.
Every room which contains oil burning equipment or
has storage tanks of greater capacity and situated as
in Table 5.4 should be provided with a foam inlet for
use by the fire brigade.
The inlet should be sited on an external wall not
more than 900 mm above ground level and at least
3 m horizontally from any opening to the protected
room to ensure that the fire brigade personnel are
able to use the inlet without hindrance from heat
and smoke which may emerge from the opening.
A firefighting emergency switch should be provided
for:
-
exterior discharge lighting installations operating
at a voltage exceeding low voltage; and
The pipe from its inlet coupling should have an
internal diameter of 80 mm (nominal), be without
acute bends and not exceed 10 m in length to the
point of discharge of the foam. Inlets should be fitted
with a 63.5 mm instantaneous coupling complying
with  BS 336: 1989.
-
interior discharge lighting installations operating
unattended at a voltage exceeding low voltage.
For the purposes of these provisions an installation
in a closed market or in an arcade is considered to
be an exterior installation.
Table 5.4
Provision of foam inlets
Situation of room
Contents
Provision of foam inlets
Wholly below ground and area greater than 45 m2
- heating appliance(s)
One inlet per 45 m2 of floor 
> 45 kW
area of room
- oil storage tank(s)
> 2,000 litres
Accessible only from inside the building
- heating appliance(s)
One inlet per 45 m2 of floor area
> 45 kW
of room
- oil storage tank(s)
> 2,000 litres
132

5.4.2.2 Requirements for switches - Every
firefighting emergency switch provided should
comply with all the relevant requirements of the
following items (i) to (iv).
for personnel and in these situations ventilation
which is independent of any stairways will be of
assistance.
Provisions for ventilation in car parks are included in
3.5.2.  These provision principally relate to the fire
resistance requirements for the elements of
structure, but will also assist fire-fighting.
(i) For exterior installations, the switch should be
outside the building and adjacent to the discharge
lamp(s), or, alternatively, a notice indicating the
position of the switch shall be placed adjacent to
the discharge lamp(s) and a nameplate should be
fixed near the switch so as to render it clearly
distinguishable.
5.4.3.1 Basements - Smoke ventilation from
basements generally take the form of outlets vents
connected directly to the open air.  Such ventilation
should be provided from every basement storey
except in the following:
(ii) For interior installations, the switch should be in
the main entrance to the building or in another
position to be agreed with the local fire
authority.
(a) a basement in a dwelling house (Purpose Group
1(a) and 1(b));
(b) a basement having an area less than 200 m2 and a
floor which is not more than 3 m below the
adjacent ground level.
(iii) The switch should be placed in a conspicuous
position, reasonably accessible to fire fighters
and, except where otherwise agreed with the
local fire authority, at not less than 2.75 m from
the ground.
Smoke vents should be sited at high level and should
be distributed around the building perimeter to
maximise the effectiveness of cross-ventilation.  The
clear cross-sectional area of all smoke vents, allowing
for frames and louvres, should not be less than 2.5%
of the basement storey served.  Where a basement
is compartmented, each compartment should be
ventilated separately.  Generally, smoke vents from
basements should be permanently open and
unobstructed, but where they are readily accessible
from the outside, consideration can be given to
suitably indicated removable covers.  Smoke vents
should not be positioned where they would prevent
the use of the means of escape from the building.
(iv) Where more than one switch is installed on any
one building, each switch should be clearly
marked to indicate the installation or part of the
installation which it controls, and the local fire
authority should be notified accordingly.
Note:
Wherever practicable, all exterior
installations on any one building should be controlled
by a single fireman's switch. Similarly, all internal
installations in any one building should be controlled
by a single fire fighter's switch independent of the
switch for any external installation.
For the purpose of the above provisions, low voltage
is defined as not exceeding 1000 V a.c, or 1500 V
d.c. between conductors, or 600 V a.c. or 900 V d.c.
between any conductor and earth.
As an alternative to outlet vents as described above,
a system of mechanical extraction may be provided,
where the basement is also protected by an
appropriate sprinkler system complying with BS
5306: Part 2: 1990.  The ventilation system should
meet the criteria set out in 3.5.2.5 and should
operate automatically on activation of the sprinkler
system.
Ventilation of Heat and Smoke
5.4.3
Ventilation of heat and smoke plays an
important role in fire-fighting operations.  How this
can be achieved, if and when required, is generally a
matter for the fire brigade.  However, certain design
features will assist in this regard.  Fire-fighting in
basement areas can present difficulties with access
Basement car parks are not normally expected to be
fitted with sprinklers.
133

5.4.3.2 Escape stairways - Smoke control in
escape stairways is of assistance at the later stages in
the development of a fire and will assist fire brigade
operations.  Smoke control is usually provided by
openable windows or openable vents at the top of
the enclosure.  Every protected stairway enclosure
should be provided with:
-
Shop (Purpose Group 4),
-
Industrial (Purpose Group 6), or
-
Storage (Purpose Group 7).
Ventilation facilities include roof mounted exhaust
ventilators of suitable size and distribution and
adequate inlet air provisions.  The space below the
roof generally requires division into smoke
reservoirs of appropriate dimensions.  Ventilation
may also be provided or supplemented by the nature
of the roof/building fabric, such as by the use of
rooflights.  It may also be possible to provide inlet air
from adjacent smoke reservoirs or by means of
external windows or doors.  Facilities for the
ventilation of heat and smoke for firefighting
purposes are not generally required to operate
automatically.
(i) openable windows at each upper storey or
landing; or
(ii) an openable vent having clear openable area of
not less than 1 m2 situated at the top of the
enclosure.  This vent should be automatically
opened by activation of smoke detectors in the
stairway enclosure and should also be manually
openable for fire brigade use.
5.4.3.3
Large undivided and windowless
spaces - Large undivided floor areas can present
difficult firefighting problems.  The accumulation of
heat and smoke in a fire may prevent access to these
areas and limit the potential for rescue and effective
firefighting from within the building.  The provision
of smoke and heat venting can greatly improve the
effectiveness of such operations.
Guidance on the design of ventilation systems
appropriate for these purposes are contained in
Section 3, Chapter 9 of the Society of Fire
Protection Engineers "Handbook of Fire Protection
Engineering" (2nd Edition).  Guidance is also
contained in the National Fire Protection
Association Fire Code 204M "Guide for Smoke and
Heat Venting".
Fire extinguishment is normally accomplished by
absorption of heat by water from hose streams or
sprinklers.  The reduction of heat build-up within the
building by adequate venting facilities can reduce the
amount of water required for cooling and
extinguishment.  However, ventilation is not a
substitute for sprinklers or other extinguishing
facilities.  Its purpose is to release smoke and heat
from the building and to improve accessibility for the
fire services.
Note: Ventilation of heat and smoke may also be
required for the purpose of protecting the means of
escape (see Section B1) in large and complex
buildings such as shopping centres (see also 3.5.3),
large assembly and recreation buildings and buildings
with an atrium (see 3.5.5).
The principles described above are equally applicable
to large windowless accommodation, where a fire
has very limited ability to vent to the outside, and
thereby giving rise to difficulties with firefighting
operations.
Facilities for ventilation of smoke and heat for the
purpose of assisting the fire service in the protection
of life and property should be provided in single
storey buildings or compartments exceeding 4,000
m2 in area or 20,000 m3 in cubic capacity (see
Appendix C, Diagram 35) having the following uses:
134

135

Appendix A
Performance of Materials and Structures
General
Fire Resistance
A1
Many of the provisions in this Document are
given in terms of performance in relation to standard
methods of tests identified below.  In such cases the
material, product or structure should:
A3 Factors having a bearing on fire resistance, that
are considered in this document, are:
(a)
fire severity,
(a) be shown by test to be capable of meeting that
performance, or
(b)
building height, or depth,
(c)
building occupancy, and
(b) have been assessed, analysed and appraised as
meeting that performance (for this purpose,
competent persons, laboratories accredited for
conducting the relevant test, and other approving
bodies might be expected to have the necessary
expertise) or,
(d)
intervention by fire fighters.
A4 The standards of fire resistance given are based
on assumptions about the severity of fires and the
consequences should an element fail.  Fire severity is
estimated in very broad terms from the use of the
building (its purpose group), on the assumption that
the building contents (which constitute the fire load)
are the same for buildings in the same use.  In the
simplest terms, the concentration of combustible
material indicates the maximum temperature to
which construction elements may be heated.
Important Note: For materials/products where
European standards or approvals are not yet
available and for a transition period after they
become available, National Standards may
continue to be used. Where European product
standards or approvals are available, any body
notified to the European Commission as
competent to assess such materials or products
against the relevant European standards or
technical approval can be considered to have the
appropriate expertise.
From estimates of the amount of combustible
material per unit of floor area in various types of
building (the fire load density), which were made for
the Post-War Building Study No. 20 on the Fire
Grading of Buildings, minimum standards have been
devised for fire resistance.  In this Technical
Guidance Document, these basic standards have
been modified according to particular features of the
building affecting the risk to life, which are:
(c) where tables of notional performance are
included in this Document, conform with an
appropriate specification given in these tables, or
(d) in the case of fire-resisting elements, conform
with an appropriate specification given in Part II
of the Building Research Establishments' Report
(BR 128) 'Guidelines for the construction of fire-
resisting structural elements' .
(a)
height of the top floor above ground, which
affects the ease of escape and of fire fighting
operations, and the consequences should large
scale collapse occur;
A2
Building Regulations deal with fire safety in
buildings as a whole and they are aimed at limiting
fire hazard.
(b)
occupancy, which reflects the ease with which
the building can be evacuated quickly;
(c)
basements, where the lack of an external wall
through which to vent heat and smoke may
increase heat build-up as well as complicating
fire-fighting, thereby prolonging the fire; and
The aim of standard fire tests is to measure or assess
the response of a material, product, structure or
system to one or more aspects of fire behaviour.
Standard fire tests cannot normally measure fire
hazard.  They form only one of a number of factors
that need to be taken into account.  Other factors
are those set out in this Technical Guidance
Document.
(d)
single storey construction, where escape is
direct and structural failure is unlikely to
precede evacuation.
136

Because the use of buildings is subject to change, a
precise estimate of fire severity based on the fire
load due to a particular use may be misleading.  A
fire engineering approach of this kind must show a
suitable factor of safety, to cater for these possible
variations in fire load.
The relevant European test methods under I.S. EN
1364, 1365, 1366 and 1634 are listed in Appendix F.
Table A1 gives the specific requirements for each
element in terms of the three following performance
criteria (provisions for fire doors are set out in
Appendix B, Table B1):
Fire Resistance Performance
(a)
resistance to collapse (loadbearing capacity),
which applies to loadbearing elements, denoted
R in the European classification of the
resistance to fire performance;
A5
Performance in terms of the fire resistance to
be met by elements of structure, doors and other
forms of construction is determined by reference to
either;
(b)
resistance to fire, smoke and hot gases
penetration (integrity), which applies to fire
separating elements, denoted E in the European
classification of the resistance to fire
performance; and
(a)
Commission Decision 
2003/629/EC of 27th August 
2003 amending Commission Decision 
2000/367/EC of 3rd May 2000 
implementing the Council Directive
89/106/EEC as regards the 
classification of the resistance
to fire performance of construction 
products, construction works and 
parts thereof  and any subsequent amendments
or 
(b)
(National tests) BS 476: Parts 20-24: 
1987 (or to BS 476 Part 8: 1972 in 
respect of items tested or assessed 
prior to 1st January 1988).
(c)
resistance to the transfer of excessive heat
(insulation), which applies to fire separating
elements, denoted I in the European
classification of resistance to fire performance.
Table A2 sets out the minimum periods of fire
resistance for elements of structure.
Table A3 sets out criteria appropriate to the
suspended ceilings that can be accepted as
contributing to the fire resistance of a floor.
Important Note: The year designation of xxxx is used
for pending European standards that are not yet
published.
Table A4 sets out limitations on the use of
uninsulated fire-resisting glazed elements.
Results of tests on fire-resisting elements are given
in the following publications:
All products are classified in accordance with I.S. EN
13501-2 : 2003, Fire classification of construction
products and building elements, Part 2 -
Classification using data from fire resistance tests
(excluding products for use in ventilation systems).
Association of Specialist Fire Protection/Steel
Construction Institute/Fire Test Study Group
-
Fire protection for structural steel in 
buildings, second edition - revised 1992
(available from the ASFP,
Association House, 99 West Street, 
Farnham, Surrey, GU9 7EN and the 
Steel Construction Institute, Silwood 
Park, Ascot, Berks, SL5 7QN).
I.S. EN 13501-3: xxxx, Fire classification of
construction products and building elements, Part 3 -
Classification using data from fire resistance tests on
components of normal building service installations
(other than smoke control systems).
I.S. EN 13501-4: xxxx, Fire classification of
construction products and building elements, Part 4 -
Classification using data from fire resistance tests on
smoke control systems.
137

Loss Prevention Council (LPC)
(c) (National tests) BS 476: part 3: 2004
-
Rules for the construction and installation of
firebreak doors and shutters, 1988.  (Available
from LPC, BRE, Bucknalls Lane, Garston,
Watford, Herts, WD25 9XX, UK.)
Important Note: The year designation of xxxx is used
for pending European standards that are not yet
published.
All constructions are classified within the European
system as BROOF(t4), CROOF(t4), DROOF(t4),
EROOF(t4) or FROOF(t4) (with BROOF(t4) being the
highest performance and FROOF(t4) being the
lowest) in accordance with I.S. EN 13501-5: xxxx,
Fire classification of construction products and
building elements, Part 5 – Classification using test
data from external fire exposure to roof tests.
Information on tested elements is also frequently
given in literature available from manufacturers and
trade associations.  Any reference used to
substantiate the fire resistance rating of a
construction should be carefully checked to ensure
that it is suitable, adequate and applicable to the
construction to be used.  Small differences in detail
(such as fixing method, joints, dimensions, etc.) may
significantly affect the rating.
Roof covering products (and/or materials) can be
considered to fulfil all of the requirements for the
performance characteristic “external fire
performance” without the need for testing if they
are listed in Commission Decision 2000/553/EC of
6th September 2000 implementing Council Directive
89/106/EEC as regards the external fire performance
of roof coverings.
Fire resisting elements of construction should be
strictly in accordance with the specification and
method of construction which, by the criteria
indicated at A1, can be shown to be capable of
meeting the required performance.  Fire resisting
elements of construction should not incorporate any
components, such as building services, which could
compromise their fire resistance performance.  Any
openings for services which pass through fire
resisting construction should be adequately
protected and fire stopped to ensure that the fire
resistance of the element is not impaired (see 3.4).
Care and attention to detail should also be taken at
the junctions between fire resisting elements of
construction to ensure that the integrity of the fire
resistance is maintained.
All constructions are classified within the National
system by 2 letters in the range A to D, with an AA
designation being the best. The first letter indicates
the time to penetration and the second letter a
measure of the spread of flame.
Table A5 gives notional designations of some generic
roof coverings.
Reaction to fire
A7 Performance in terms of reaction to fire to be
met by construction products is determined by
Commission Decision 2003/632/EC of 26th August
2003 amending Commission Decision 2000/147/EC
of 8th February 2000 implementing Council
Directive 89/106/EEC as regards the classification of
the reaction to fire performance of construction
products and any subsequent amendments.
Roofs
A6  Performance in terms of the resistance of roofs
to external fire exposure is determined by reference
to either:-
(a) (European tests) Commission Decisions
2005/823/EC amending Decision 2001/671/EC of
22nd November 2005 establishing a classification
system for the external fire performance of roofs
and roof coverings and any subsequent amendments;
All products, excluding floorings, are classified as
A1, A2, B, C, D, E or F (with class A1 being the
highest performance and F being the lowest) in
accordance with I.S. EN 13501-1: 2002, Fire
classification of construction products and building
(b) I.S. ENV 1187: 2002; or
138

elements, Part 1-Classification using data from
reaction to fire tests.
flame' are rated for performance by reference to the
method specified in BS 476: Part 7: 1971 or 1987
under which materials or products are classified 1, 2,
3 or 4 - with Class 1 being the highest (Class 4
ratings are not acceptable under the provisions in
this document).
The relevant European test methods are specified as
follows,
I.S. EN ISO 1182: 2002, Reaction to fire tests for
building products - Non-combustibility test.
A10
The European reaction to fire classification
system is based on the principle that construction
products should be tested in the I.S. EN 13823 test
in a manner that is representative of their “end use”
application. This means that realistic jointing and
fixing arrangements should be included within the
specimens that are tested. It is important to
recognise this fact since, as a consequence, a
construction product may have several different
European reaction to fire classes depending upon its
“end use” application. Clearly, for many construction
products there are a large number of combinations
and variations possible. Where European Technical
Specifications for products have been published or
are being developed, guidance on appropriate
reaction to fire test arrangements should be
available. However, for those products for which no
specific guidance exists, general guidance is available
in the Technical Specification “Mounting and fixing in
reaction to fire tests under the CPD”.
I.S. EN ISO 1716: 2002 Reaction to fire tests for
building products - Determination of the gross
calorific value.
I.S. EN 13823 : 2002, Reaction to fire tests for
building products - Building products excluding
floorings exposed to the thermal attack by a single
burning item.
I.S. EN ISO 11925 - 2: 2002, Reaction to fire tests
for building Products, Part 2 - Ignitability when
subjected to direct impingement of a flame.
I.S. EN 13238 : 2001, Reaction to fire tests for
building products - conditioning procedures and
general rules for selection of substrates.
Note: The classes of reaction to fire performance of
A1, A2, B, C, D and E are accompanied by additional
classifications related to the production of smoke
(s1, s2, s3) and/or flaming droplets/particles (d0, d1,
d2).
A11
To restrict to a minimum the use of
materials which ignite easily, have a high rate of heat
release and/or which reduce the time to flashover,
maximum acceptable 'fire propagation' indices are
specified.  These are determined by reference to the
method specified in BS 476: Part 6: 1981 or 1989.
Index of performance (I) relates to the overall test
performance, where sub-index (11) is derived from
the first three minutes of test.
Internal Linings
A8
Flame spread over wall or ceiling surfaces is
controlled by providing for the lining materials or
products to meet given performance levels in tests
appropriate to the materials or products involved.
A12
The 
highest 
product 
performance
classification is Class 0.  This is achieved if a material
or the surface together with its substrate of a
composite product is either:
A9 Under the European classifications, lining
systems are classified in accordance with I.S. EN
13501-1:2002, Fire classification of construction
products and building elements, Part 1 -
Classification using data from reaction to fire tests.
Materials or products are classified as A1, A2, B, C,
D, E or F with A1 being the highest. When a
classification includes “s3, d2”, it means that there is
no limit set for smoke production and/or flaming
droplets/particles.
(a)
composed throughout of materials of limited
combustibility (see A18), or
(b)
a Class 1 material which has a fire propagation
index (I) of not more than 12 and sub-index
(11) of not more than 6.
Under the National classifications, lining systems
which can be effectively tested for 'surface spread of
Note: Class 0 is not a classification identified in any
Standard test.
139

A13 No thermoplastic material in isolation can be
assumed to protect a surface underlying it.  The
surface rating of both products must meet the
required classification.  If however, the thermoplastic
material is fully bonded to a non-thermoplastic
substrate, then only the surface rating of the
composite will need to comply.
(ii)
solid (as distinct from double - or multiple-skin)
polycarbonate sheet at least 3 mm thick;
(iii) multi-skinned rigid sheet made from
unplasticised pvc or polycarbonate which has
Class 1 rating when tested to BS 476: Part 7:
1971 or 1987;
A14
Composite products defined as materials of
limited combustibility (see A18) in Table A7 should
in addition comply with the test requirement
appropriate to any surface rating specified in
Sections B2, B3 and B4.
(iv) any other rigid thermoplastic product, a
specimen of which, when tested to BS 2782:
1970 as amended in 1974: method 508A,
performs so that the test flame extinguishes
before the first mark, and the duration of
flaming or afterglow does not exceed 5 seconds
following removal of the burner.
A15
The notional performance ratings of certain
widely-used generic materials or products are listed
in Table A6 in terms of their performance in the
traditional lining tests (BS 476: Parts 6 and 7) or in
accordance with I.S. EN 13501-1: 2002, Fire
classification of construction products and building
elements, Part 1- Classification using data from
reaction to fire tests.
TP(b):
(i)
Rigid solid polycarbonate sheet products less
than 3 mm thick, or multiple skin polycarbonate
sheet products which do not qualify as TP(a) by
test; or
Note: Information on tests on proprietary materials
is frequently given in literature available from
manufacturers and trade associations.
(ii)
Other products which, when a specimen of the
material between 1.5 and 3 mm thick is tested
in accordance with BS 2782: 1970, as amended
in 1974: method 508A, has a rate of burning
which does not exceed 50 mm/minute (if it is
not possible to cut or machine a 3 mm thick
specimen from the product then a 3 mm test
specimen can be moulded from the same
material as that used for the manufacture of the
product);  and
Any reference used to substantiate the surface
spread of flame rating of a material or product
should be carefully checked to ensure that it is
suitable, adequate and applicable to the construction
to be used.  Small differences in detail, such as
thickness, substrate, fixings, adhesive etc., may
significantly affect the rating.
(iii) the product, when ignited, does not produce
burning droplets which could contribute to the
spread of fire within a building.
A16 A thermoplastic material means any polymeric
material which has a softening point below 200°C if
tested to BS 2782: Part 1: Method 120A: 1990.
Specimens for this test may be fabricated from the
original polymer where the thickness of material of
the end product is less than 2.5 mm.
A17
Concessions are made for thermoplastic
materials used for windows, rooflights and within
suspended ceilings if they cannot be tested as
specified in pars. A9, A10 and A11.  They are
described in Sections B2 and B4.
For the purposes of Sections B2 and B4
thermoplastic materials should be used according to
the performance set out in A8 and A9 above or be
classified as TP(a) or TP(b) as follows:
TP(a) rigid:
(i)
Rigid solid pvc sheet;
140

Materials of Limited Combustibility
(c)
Only non combustible materials may be used
where there is a provision for non-combustibility and
also for the specific application in the elements listed
in table A8. Non-combustible materials may be used
whenever there is a requirement for materials of
limited combustibility.
A18  Materials of limited combustibility are defined
in Table A7,
(a)
(European classes) in terms of performance
when classified as class A2-s3, d2 in accordance with
I.S. EN 13501-1: 2002, Fire classification of
construction products and building elements, Part 1 -
Classification using data from reaction to fire tests
when tested to I.S. EN ISO 1182: 2002, Reaction to
fire tests for building products - Non combustibility
test or I.S. EN ISO 1716: 2002 Reaction to fire tests
for building products - Determination of the gross
calorific value and I.S. EN 13823: 2002 Reaction to
fire tests for building products - Building products
excluding floorings exposed to the thermal attack by
a single burning item or
Fire Test Methods
A20 A guide to the various test methods in BS 476
and BS 2782 is given in PD 6520: 1988 (BSI)
A guide to the development and presentation of fire
tests and their use in hazard assessment is given in BS
6336: 1982.
Structural Fire Design
A21
Guidance on the design of fire-resisting
structural elements for different structural materials
is contained in Part 1 of the Building Research
Establishment Report (BR 128) “Guidelines for the
construction of fire-resisting structural elements".
(b)
(National classes) by reference to the
method specified in BS 476: Part 11: 1982
(c)
(National classes) Table A7 also includes
composite products (such as plasterboard) which are
considered acceptable, and where they are exposed
as linings they should also meet any appropriate
flame spread rating.
Guidance on the performance of fire-resisting
masonry elements is contained in I.S. 325: Part 2:
1995.  Code of practice for the use of masonry, Part
2 Masonry construction.
Non-combustible Materials
Attention is drawn to the fire parts of the Structural
Eurocodes, which have been issued by CEN
(European Committee for Standardisation), as
provisional Euronorms and may only be used where
applicable, subject to the limitations and other
modifications contained in the relevant national
application document available from the National
Standards Authority of Ireland.
A19 Non combustible materials are defined in Table
A8 either as listed products, or in terms of
performance;
(a)
(European classes) when classified as class A1
in accordance with I.S. EN 13501-1: 2002, Fire
classification of construction products and building
elements, Part 1 - Classification using data from
reaction to fire tests when tested to I.S. EN ISO
1182: 2002, Reaction to fire tests for building
products - Non combustibility test and I.S. EN ISO
1716: 2002 Reaction to fire tests for building
products - Determination of the gross calorific value
or
(b)
(National classes) when tested to BS 476:
Part 4: 1970 or Part 11: 1982.
141

Table A1
Specific provisions of test for fire resistance of elements of structure, etc.
Part of building
Mininum provisions
Minimum provisions when tested to 
Method of 
when tested
relevant parts of BS 476 (1) (minutes)
exposure
to the relevant (7)
European standard Loadbearing
Integrity
Insulation
(minutes)
capacity (2)
1. Structural frame, beam or column
R*
*
No provision
No Provision
Exposed faces
2. Loadbearing wall (which is not also a wall
R*
*
No provision
No provision
each side 
described in any of the following items)
separately
3. Floors
(a)
floor in upper storey of a 2 storey
R 30, 
30
15
15
from underside (3)
house (but not over a garage)
REI 15
(b) any other floor including compartment
REI*
*
*
*
from underside (3)
floors
4. Roofs
Any part forming an escape route
REI 30
30
30
30
from underside (3)
5. External walls
(a)
any part less than 1 m from any point
REI*
*
*
*
each side 
on relevant boundary
separately
(b) any part 1m or more from the
RE*, 
*
*
15 (4)
from inside
relevant boundary
REI 15
6. Separating wall (5)
RE*
*
*
*
each side 
(min 60)
(min 60)
(min 60)
(min 60)
separately
7. Compartment wall
REI*
*
*
*
each side 
separately
8. Protected shafts excluding any
firefighting shaft
(a)
any glazing described in Section
E30
N/A
30
No provision (6)
each side 
B3, 3.2.7.3 and Diagram 15
separately
(b) any other part between the shaft
REI 30
30
30
30
each side 
and a protected lobby/corridor
separately
described in Diagram 15
(c)
any part not described in (a) or (b)
REI*
*
*
*
each side
above
separately
9. Enclosure (which does not form part of a
compartment wall or a protected shaft)
to a -
(a)
protected stairway
REI 30(6)
30
30
30 (6)
each
(b) lift shaft, or
REI 30
30
30
30
side
(c)
service shaft,
REI 30
30
30
30
separately
10. Firefighting shafts:
(a)
construction separating firefighting
REI 120
120
120
120
from side remote 
shaft from rest of building
from shaft
REI 60
60
60
60
from shaft side
(b) construction separating firefighting
REI 60
60
60
60
each side
stairway, firefighting lift shaft and
separately
firefighting lobby
142

Table A1(contd)
Specific provisions of test for fire resistance of elements of structure, etc.
Part of building
Minimum provisions
Minimum provisions when tested to 
Method of 
when tested 
relevant parts of BS 476 (1) (minutes)
exposure
to the relevant (7)
European standard
Loadbearing
Integrity
Insulation
(minutes)
capacity (2)
11. Enclosure (which is not a compartment
wall or described in item 8) to a -
(a) protected lobby, or
REI 30 (6)
30
30
30 (6)
each side
(b) protected corridor
REI 30 (6)
30
30
30 (6)
separately
12. Subdivision of a corridor
REI 30 (6)
30
30
30 (6)
each side
separately
13. Wall separating an attached or integral
REI 30 (6)
30
30
30
from garage side
garage from a dwelling house
14. Enclosure to a -
(a) protected entrance, hall, or
REI 30 (6)
30
30
30 (6)
each side 
separately
(b) protected stairway in a flat or
REI 30 (6)
30
30
30 (6)
maisonette
15. Fire-resisting construction in dwellings
REI 30 (6)
30
30
30 (6)
each side 
not described elsewhere
separately
16. Cavity barrier
EI 15,
No provision
30
15
each side 
E30
separately
17. Ceiling described in Diagrams 18 and 19
EI 30
N/A
30
30
from underside
18. Duct described in Section B3,
paragraph 3.3.5(e)
E30
N/A
30
No provision
from outside
19. Casing around a drainage system
described in 3.4 and Diagram 22
E30
N/A
30
No provision
from outside
20. Flue walls described in 3.4.4 and
EIo
N/A
o
o
from outside
Diagrams 24
21. Fire doors
See Table B1 of Appendix B
Notes
*
Denotes the minimum period of fire resistance set out in Table A2.
o
Denotes half the minimum period of fire resistance set out in Table A2 for the compartment wall/floor.
N/A
Denotes that provision is not applicable.
(1)
BS 476 Part 21 for loadbearing elements, Part 22 for non-loadbearing elements, Part 23 for fire-protecting suspended ceilings; and
Part 24 for ventilation ducts  (tests to BS 476: Part 8 are permitted subject to paragraph A5).
(2)
Applies to loadbearing elements only.
(3)
A suspended ceiling should only be relied on to contribute to the fire resistance of the floor if the ceiling meets the appropriate
provisions given in Table A3.
(4)
30 mins for any part adjacent to an external escape route (but no provision for glazed elements in respect of insulation).
(5)
See Part B3, 3.2.5.6 for requirements for construction of separating walls.
(6)
Except for any limitations on glazed elements given in Table A4.
(7)
The National classifications do not automatically equate with the equivalent classifications in the European column, therefore
products cannot typically assume a European class unless they have been tested accordingly.
R is the European classification of the resistance to fire performance in respect of loadbearing capacity
E is the European classification of the resistance to fire performance in respect of integrity and
I is the European classification of the resistance to fire performance in respect of insulation.
143

Table A2
Minimum periods of fire resistance for elements of structure
Minimum period (minutes) for elements of Structure in a -
Purpose group of buildings
Basement storey
#
Ground or upper storey
(including floor over)
Depth (3) (m) of 
Height (3) (m) of top storey in 
lowest basement
building or of separated part
more 
not more
not more
not more
not more
more
than 10
than 10
than 5
than 20
than 30
than 30
1.
Residential (Domestic)
-
Houses
-
30*
30*
30*
-
-
-
Flats and maisonettes
90
60
30*
60**
90**
120**
2.
Residential
(a)
Institutional
90
60
60
60
90
120ø
(b)
Other residential
90
60
30*
60
90
120ø
3.
Office
-
not sprinklered
90
60
30*
60
90
✗
-
sprinklered
60
60
30*
30*
60
120ø
4
(a)  Shop
-
not sprinklered
90
60
60
60
90
✗
-
sprinklered (1)
60
60
30*
60
60
120ø
4
(b)  Shopping Centre
See 3.5.3
See 3.5.3
5.
Assembly and Recreation
-
not sprinklered
90
60
60
60
90
✗
-
sprinklered (1)
60
60
30*
60
60
120ø
6.
Industrial
-
not sprinklered
120
90
60
90
120
✗
-
sprinklered (1)
90
60
30*
60
90
120ø
7(b) Car park
(i)
open sided (2)
✗
✗
15*
15*
15*
✗
(ii)
any other
90
60
30*
60
90
120ø
7(a)  Storage and
8.
Other non-residential
-
not sprinklered
120
90
60
90
120
✗
-
sprinklered
90
60
30*
60
90
120ø
Notes
✗
not permitted
Modifications
*
Increased to 60 minutes for separating walls
**
Reduced to 30 minutes for any floor within a maisonette (but not if the floor contributes to the support of the building as a
whole)
ø
Reduced to 90 minutes for elements not forming part of the structural frame
≠
The floor over a basement (or if there is more than 1 basement, the floor over the topmost basement) should meet the
provisions for the ground and upper storeys if that period is higher.
(1)
"Sprinklered" means that the building is fitted throughout with an automatic sprinkler system meeting the relevant
recommendations of BS 5306: Part 2, i.e. the relevant occupancy rating together with the additional requirements for life
safety.
(2)
The car park should comply with the relevant provisions in Section B3, 3.5.2.  Refer to Table A1 for specific provisions of
test.
(3)
For height of top storey or depth of basement, see Appendix C, Diagram 38.
Refer to Table A1 for specific provisions of test for fire resistance of elements of structure.
144

Application of the Fire Resistance
Standards in Table A2
(i)
is part of (or supports) an external wall
and there is provision in B4 to limit the
extent of openings and other unprotected
areas in the wall: or
(ii)
is part of (or supports) a compartment
wall, a separating wall or a wall between a
dwelling house and an attached or integral
garage; or
(iii) supports a gallery.
(a)
Where one element of structure supports or
carries or gives stability to another, the fire
resistance of the supporting element should be
no less than the minimum period of fire
resistance for the other element (whether that
other element is loadbearing or not).
For the purposes of this paragraph, the ground
storey of a building which has one or more
basement storeys and no upper storeys, may be
considered as single storey.  The fire resistance
of the basement storeys should be that
appropriate to basements.
There are circumstances where it may be
reasonable to vary this principle, for example
where the supporting structure is in the open
air; or
(b)
Where an element of structure forms part of
more than one building or compartment, that
element should be constructed to the standard
of the greater of the relevant provisions.
(d)
Where one side of a basement is (due to the
slope of the ground) open at ground level,
giving an opportunity for smoke venting and
access for fire fighting, it may be appropriate to
adopt for elements of structure in that storey,
the standard of fire resistance applicable to
above ground structure.
(c)
Although some elements of structure in a single
storey building may be excluded from needing
fire resistance (see B3, par. 3.1.4(a)), fire
resistance will be needed if the element:
Table A3
Limitations on fire-protecting suspended ceilings
Height of building 
Type of floor
Provisions of fire resistance 
Description of 
or of separated part (m)
of floor (mins)
suspended ceiling
Less than 15
not compartment
60 or less
compartment
less than 60
Type W,X,Y ,Z
60
Type X,Y or Z
15 or more
any
60 or less
Type Y or Z
no limit
any
more than 60
Type Z
Notes:
The ceiling type and description have changed from types A-D to types W -Z to avoid confusion with classes A-D (European)
Ceiling Type
Description
W
-
Surface of ceiling exposed to the cavity should be Class C-s3, d2 or better (European) or Class O or Class 1
(National).
X
-
Surface of ceiling exposed to the cavity should be Class B-s3, d2 or better (European) or Class O (National).
Y
-
Surface of ceiling exposed to the cavity should be Class B-s3, d2 or better (European) or Class O (National).
Ceiling should not contain easily openable access panels.
Z
-
Ceiling should be of a material of Class A2-s3, d2 or better (European) or of limited combustibility (National) and
not contain easily openable access panels.
Any insulation above the ceiling should be of a material of Class A2-s3, d2 or better (European) or of limited
combustibility (National).
Any removable panels provided in fire protecting suspended ceilings of type Y or Z should be secured in position by releasing devices or
screw fixings, and they should be shown to be of types which have been tested in the type of ceiling assembly in which they are
incorporated.
The National classifications do not automatically equate with the equivalent European classifications, therefore products cannot typically
assume a European class unless they have been tested accordingly.
When a classification includes “s3, d2”, this means that there is no limit set for smoke production and/or flaming droplets/particles.
145

Table A4
Limitations on the use of uninsulated fire resisting glazed elements on escape 
routes
Position of glazed element
Maximum total glazed area in parts of a building with access to:
a single stairway   
more than one stairway
Walls
Door Leaf
Walls
Door Leaf
(1) Dwelling house
(a)
within the enclosures to a protected stairway
Fixed 
Unlimited
Fixed 
Unlimited
or within fire-resisting construction shown in
fanlights 
fanlights 
Diagram 9
only
only
(2) Within the enclosures to a protected entrance hall or
Fixed 
Unlimited 
Fixed 
Unlimited 
protected landing of a flat or maisonette
fanlights
above 1.1 m
fanlights 
above 1.1m
only
only
(3) Between residential/sleeping accommodation and a
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
common escape route (corridor, lobby or stairway)
(4) *Between a protected stairway (+) and -
(a)
the accommodation: or
Nil
25% of 
Unlimited 
50% of door 
(b)
a corridor which is not a protected corridor
door area
above 1.1 m ≠
area
(5) *Between -
(a)
a protected stairway (+) and a protected
Unlimited 
Unlimited 
Unlimited 
Unlimited 
lobby or protected corridor:
above 1.1 m
above 0.1 m
above 1.1 m
above 0.1 m
(b)
the accommodation and a protected lobby
from floor
from floor
from floor
from floor
(6) *Between the accommodation and a protected
Unlimited 
Unlimited 
Unlimited 
Unlimited 
corridor forming a dead end;
above 1.1 m
above 1.1 m
above 1.1 m
above 1.1 m
from floor
from floor
from floor
from floor
(7) *(a)
Between the accommodation and any other 
N/A
N/A
Unlimited above 
Unlimited 
corridor:
0.1 m
above 0.1 m
(b)
Subdividing corridors
from floor
from floor
Notes:
*
But not any such part included in item 3.
(+)
If the protected stairway is also a protected shaft (see B3) or a firefighting stairway (see B5), the use of glazed elements may be
further restricted.
≠
Measured vertically from the landing floor level or the stairway pitch line.
Table A5
Notional designations of roof coverings
Part 1:  Pitched roofs covered with slates or tiles
Covering Material
Supporting Structure
Designation
1.
Natural slates
1.
Timber rafters with or without underfelt,
BROOF(t4) (European class)
2.
Fibre-cement slates
sarking, boarding, wood wool slabs,
or
3.
Clay tiles
plywood, wood chipboard, or fibre
AA (National class)
4.
Concrete tiles
insulating board
5.
Strip slates of bitumen felt
2.
Timber rafters and boarding, plywood,
DROOF(t4) (European class)
Class 1 or 2
wood wool slabs, compressed straw slabs,
or
wood chipboard, or fibre insulating board
CC (National class)
6.
Bitumen felt strip slates Type 2E,
3.
Timber rafters and boarding, plywood, wood
CROOF(t4) (European class)
with underlay of bitumen felt Type 2B
wool slabs, compressed straw slabs, wood
or
chipboard or fibre insulating board
BB (National class)
Note:
Any reference in this Table to bitumen felt of a specified type is a reference felt as so designed in I.S. 36: Part 1: 1986 and Part 2: 1987.
146

Table A5
Notional designations of roof coverings
Part II:  Pitched roofs covered with pre-formed  self-supporting sheets
Material
Construction
Supporting Structure
Designation
Profiled sheets of:
1. single skin without underlay
structure of timber, steel 
BROOF(t4)
(i)
galvanised steel
or with underlay of -
or concrete
(European class)
(ii)
aluminium
(i)
plasterboard
or
(iii) fibre reinforced cement
(ii)
fibre insulating board
AA (National Class)
(iv) pvc coated steel
(iii) wood wool slab
Profiled sheets of:
2. double skin without underlay
structure of timber, steel 
BROOF(t4)
(i)
galvanised steel
or with underlay of -
or concrete
(European class)
(ii)
aluminium
(i)
resin-bonded glass fibre
or
(iii) composite steel and fibre-cement
(ii)
bitumen-bonded glass fibre
AA (National Class)
(iv) fibre-cement or
(iii) mineral wool slab or blanket
(v)
pvc coated steel
(iv) polystyrene or
(v)
polyurethane
Table A5
Notional designations of roof coverings
Part III:  Pitched or flat roofs covered with fully supporting material
Covering Material
Supporting Structure
Designation
1.
Aluminium sheet
1. Timber joists and -
BROOF(t4)*
2.
Copper sheet
(i)
tongued and grooved boarding, or
(European class)
3.
Zinc sheet
(ii)
plain edged boarding
or
4.
Lead sheet
AA* (National Class)
5.
Mastic asphalt
6.
Vitreous enamelled steel sheet
2. Steel or timber joists with deck of -
BROOF(t4)
7.
Lead/tin alloy coated steel sheet
(i)
wood wool slab
(European class)
8.
Zinc/alluminium alloy coated steel
(ii)
compressed straw slab
or
sheet.
(iii) wood or flax chipboard
AA (National Class)
9.
Pre-painted (coil coated) steel
(iv) fibre insulating board, or
sheet including liquid-applied pvc
(v)
9.5 mm plywood
coatings
3. Concrete or clay pot slab (cast in situ or precast),
BROOF(t4)
or non-combustible deck of steel, aluminium or
(European class)
fibre-cement (with or without insulation)
or
AA (National Class)
Note:
*
Lead sheet supported by timber joists and plain edge boarding is deemed to be designated class CROOF(t4) (European class) or BA
(National class).
147

Table A5
Notional designations of roof coverings
Part IV(A):  Flat roofs covered with bitumen felt
A flat roof comprising a covering of bitumen felt shall (irrespective of the felt specification) be deemed to be of class BROOF(t4)
(European class) or AA (National class) if the felt is laid on a deck constructed of any of the materials prescribed in the Table in Part
IV(B) and has a surface finish of;
(a)
bitumen bedded stone chippings covering the whole surface to a depth of not less than 12.5 mm
(b) bitumen bedded tiles of a non-combustible material
(c)
sand and cement screed or
(d) macadam
Table A5
Notional designations of roof coverings
Part IV(B):   Pitched roofs covered with bitumen felt
Number of 
Type of 
Type of 
Deck of either 
Deck of 
Deck of 
Fibre-cement 
Aluminium 
Concrete
layers
upper layer
under-layer(s)
of the following 
compressed 
screeded 
or steel 
single or 
or pot 
(having minimum 
straw slab
woodwool 
single or 
double 
slab (cast 
thickness stated) 
slab
double skin 
skin deck 
in situ 
plywood (6mm). 
deck (without 
(without 
or precast)
wood chipboard 
overlay or 
overlay or 
(12.5mm). 
with overlay 
with overlay 
T&G boarding 
of fibre 
of fibre 
(16mm finished) 
insulating 
insulating 
or Plain edged 
board)
board)
boarding (19mm 
finished)
Two or 
1. Type 1E
Type 1B 
DROOF (t4) 
BROOF(t4) 
BROOF(t4) 
BROOF(t4)
BROOF(t4)
BROOF(t4)
three 
(minimum 
(European class)  
(European 
(European
(European
(European
(European
layers 
mass 
or CC (National 
class) or AC
class) or AC
class) or AC
class) or AC class) or AB
built up in 
13kg/10m2)
class)
(National
(National
(National
(National
(National
accordance
class)
class)
class)
class)
class)
with CP144: 
Part 3: 1970
2. Type 2E
Type 1B 
CROOF (t4)
BROOF(t4)
BROOF(t4)
BROOF(t4)
BROOF(t4)
BROOF(t4)
(minimum 
(European class)
(European 
(European 
(European 
(European 
(European 
mass 
or BB (National
class) or AB
class) or AB
class) or AB
class) or AB class) or AB
13kg/10m2)
class)
(National
(National
(National
(National
(National
class)
class)
class)
class)
class)
3. Type 3E
Type 3B 
CROOF(t4)
BROOF(t4)
BROOF(t4)
BROOF(t4)
BROOF(t4)
BROOF(t4)
or 3G
(European class)
(European
(European
(European
(European
(European
or BC (National
class) or AC
class) or AB
class) or AB
class) or AB class) or AB
class)
(National
(National
(National
(National
(National
class)
class)
class)
class)
class)
Note: 
Any reference in this Table to bitumen felt of a specified type is a reference to bitumen felt as so designated in I.S. 36: Part 1: 1986 and
Part 2: 1987.
148

Table A6
Typical performance ratings of some generic materials and products
European 
Material or Product 
National
Material or Product
Rating
Rating
Class A1 
1.
Any material that achieves this class
when tested in accordance with I.S. EN
13501-1 or is class A1 without need for
testing (see table A8) or is within this
class in Commission Decision 2003/43/EC
of 17th January 2003 establishing the
classes of reaction to fire
performance for certain construction
products and any subsequent amendments.
Class A2-s3, d2 
2.
Any material or product that achieves
this class when tested in accordance with
I.S. EN 13501-1 or any construction product
with this class in Commission Decision
2003/43/EC of 17th January 2003
establishing the classes of reaction to fire
performance for certain construction
products and any subsequent amendments
Class B-s3, d2
3.
Any material or product that achieves
Class 0
6. Any non-combustible material or material
this class when tested in accordance with
of limited combustibility (composite products
I.S. EN 13501-1 or any construction product
(National) listed in Table A7 must meet
with this class in Commission Decision
the test requirements given in paragraph A12(b)).
2003/43/EC of 17th January 2003
7. Brickwork, blockwork, concrete and ceramic tiles.
establishing the classes of reaction to fire
8. Plasterboard (painted or not, with or without an air
performance for certain construction
gap or fibrous or cellular insulating material behind).
products and any subsequent amendments
9. Woodwool cement slabs.
10.Mineral fibre tiles or sheets with cement or resin
binding.
Class C-s3, d2 
4.
Any material or product that achieves
this class when tested in accordance with
I.S. EN 13501-1 or any construction product
with this class in Commission Decision as
in 3 above
Class D-s3, d2
5.
Any material or product that achieves
Class 3
11.Timber or plywood with density more than 400
this class when tested in accordance with
kg/m3, (painted or unpainted).
I.S. EN 13501-1 or any construction product
12.Wood particle board or hardboard, (either treated
with this class in Commission Decision as
or painted).
in 3 above
13.Standard glass reinforced polyesters.
Notes (European):
For the purposes of the Building Regulations
1.
Materials and products listed under Class A1 also meet Classes A2-s3, d2, B-s3, d2, C-s3, d2 and D-s3, d2.
2.
Materials and products listed under Class A2-s3, d2 also meet Classes  B-s3, d2, C-s3, d2 and D-s3, d2.
3.
Materials and products listed under Class B-s3, d2 also meet Classes C-s3, d2 and D-s3, d2.
4.
Materials and products listed under Class C-s3, d2 also meet Class D-s3, d2.
5.
The National classifications do not automatically equate with the equivalent classifications in the European column, therefore products
cannot typically assume a European class unless they have been tested accordingly.
6.
When a classification includes “s3, d2”, this means that there is no limit set for smoke production and/or flaming droplets/particles.
Notes (National):
1.
Materials and products listed under Class 0 also meet Class 1.
2.
The following materials and products may achieve the ratings listed below.  However, as the properties of different products with the
same generic description vary, the ratings of these materials/products should be substantiated by test evidence.  Materials/products
should also be assessed by reference to the toxic hazard they pose in combustion.
Class 0
-
aluminium faced fibre insulating board, flame retardant decorative laminates on a calcium silicate
board, thick polycarbonate sheet, phenolic sheet and uPVC;
Class 1
-
phenolic or melamine laminates on a calcium silicate substrate and flame retardant decorate
laminates on a combustible substrate.
149

Table A7
Use of materials of limited combustibility
Use
Material
1.
stairways where there is provision in Part B1, paragraph 1.4.4.1
(a) or (b) below (European)
for them to be constructed of materials of limited combustibility
(c), (d) or (e) below (National)
2.
materials above a suspended ceiling meeting the  provisions in
Section B3, (2)(f) of 3.3.3
3.
reinforcement/support for fire-stopping referred  to in
Section B3, 3.4.5
4.
construction in shopping complexes referred to in
Section B3, 3.5.3(b)
5.
roof covering meeting the provisions:
(a) in Section B3, 3.3.3 or
(b) in Section B4, Diagram 29
6.
class 0 materials meeting the provision in Appendix A,
paragraph A12(a)
7.
ceiling tiles or panels of any fire-protecting suspended ceiling
(Type D) in Table A3
8.
compartment walls required by 3.2.5.4 of Section B3 to be
constructed of materials of limited combustibility
9.
Insulation above any fire-protecting suspended ceiling
(a) or (b) below (European)
(Type D) in Table A3
(c), (d), (e) or (f) below (National)
10. Insulation material in external wall construction referred to in
paragraph 4.1.5
Materials of limited combustibility:
European class
(a)
Any material classified as Class A1 in accordance with I.S. EN 13501-1: 2002, Fire classification of construction products and building
elements, Part 1 - Classification using data from reaction to fire tests.
(b) Any material or product classified as Class A2-s3, d2 or better in accordance with I.S. EN 13501-1: 2002, Fire classification of
construction products and building elements, Part 1 - Classification using data from reaction to fire tests
Notes: 
The National classifications do not automatically equate with the equivalent classifications in the European 
column, therefore products cannot typically assume a European class unless they have been tested 
accordingly.
When a classification includes “s3, d2”, this means that there is no limit set for smoke production and/or 
flaming droplets/particles.
National class
(c)
Any non-combustible material listed in Table A8.
(d) Any material of density 300 kg/m3 or more which when tested to BS 476: Part 11, does not flame and the rise in temperature on the
furnace thermocouple is not more than 20 degrees celsius.
(e) Any material with a non-combustible core at least 8 mm thick having combustible facings (on one or both sides) not more than 0.5
mm thick (when a flame spread rating is specified, these materials must also meet the appropriate test requirements).
(f)
Any material of density less than 300 kg/m3, which when tested to BS 476: Part 11 does not flame for more than 10 seconds and the
rise in temperature on the centre (specimen) thermocouple is not more than 35 degrees celsius and on the furnace thermocouple is
not more than 25 degrees celsius.
150

Table A8
Use of non-combustible materials
Use
Material
1.
ladders referred to in Section B1, paragraph 1.4.4.2.
any material listed below in
2.
roof coverings meeting the provision in Section B3, Diagram 13(a).
(a) to (f)
3.
refuse chutes meeting the provisions in Section B3,
paragraph 3.2.6.2(c).
4.
suspended ceilings and their supports where provision in
Section B3, 2(c) of 3.3.3 for them to be constructed of
non-combustible materials.
5.
pipes meeting the provisions in Section B3, Table 3.4
6.
flue walls meeting the provisions in Section B3, Diagram 24
7.
construction forming car parks referred to in Section B3,
paragraph 3.5.2.1.
8.
external surfaces of walls where there is provision in
Section B4, Table 4.1, for them to be constructed of
non-combustible materials.
9.
hinges meeting the provisions in Appendix B, paragraph B5.
10. compartment walls and floors required by 3.2.5 of Section B3
to be constructed of non-combustible materials.
Non-combustible materials:
European class
(a)
Any material classified as Class A1 in accordance with I.S. EN 13501-1: 2002, Fire classification of construction products and building
elements, Part 1 - Classification using data from reaction to fire tests.
(b) Products made from one or more of the materials considered as Class A1 without the need for testing, as defined in Commission
Decision 2003/424/EC of 6th June 2003 amending Commission Decision 96/603/EC of 4th October 1996 establishing the list of
products belonging to Class A1 (No contribution to fire) provided for in the Decision 94/611/EC implementing Article 20 of the
Council Directive 89/106/EEC on construction products. None of the materials shall contain more than 1% by weight or volume
(whichever is the lower) of homogeneously distributed organic material.
Note: 
The National classifications do not automatically equate with the equivalent classifications in the European 
column, therefore products cannot typically assume a European class unless they have been tested 
accordingly.
National class
(c)
Any material which when tested to BS 476: Part II: 1982 does not flame and there is no rise in temperature on either the centre
(specimen) or furnace thermocouples.
(d) Totally inorganic materials such as concrete, fired clay, ceramics, metals, plaster and masonry containing not more than 1 per cent by
weight or volume of organic material (use in buildings of combustible metals such as magnesium/aluminium alloys should be assessed in
each individual case).
(e) Concrete bricks or blocks meeting I.S. 20: 1974; I.S. 20, Part 1: 1987 or I.S. 189: 1974.
(f)
Products classified as non-combustible under BS 476: Part 4: 1970.
151

ANNEX
Materials to be considered as reaction to fire classes Al and A1FL as provided for in Decision
2000/147/EC without the need for testing
General notes
Products should be made only of one or more of the following materials if they are to be considered as Class Al and Class A1FL without
testing. Products made by gluing one or more of the following materials together will be considered Class Al and Class A1FL without
testing provided that the glue does not exceed 0.1% by weight or volume (whichever is the more onerous).
Panel products (e.g. of insulating material) with one or more organic layers, or products containing organic material which is not
homogeneously distributed (with the exception of glue) are excluded from the list.
Products made by coating one of the following materials with an inorganic layer (e.g. coated metal products) may also be considered as
Class Al and Class A1FL without testing.
None of the materials in the table is allowed to contain more than 1.0% by weight or volume (whichever is the more onerous) of
homogeneously distributed organic material.
Material
Notes
Expanded clay.
Epanded perlite
Expanded vermiculite
Mineral wool
Cellular glass
Concrete
Includes ready-mixed concrete and precast
reinforced and prestressed products
Aggregate concrete (dense and lightweight mineral 
May contain admixtures and additions (e.g. PFA),
aggregates, excluding integral thermal insulation)
pigments and other materials. Includes precast units.
Autoclaved aerated concrete units
Units manufactured from hydraulic binders such as
cement and/or lime, combined with fine materials
(siliceous material, PEA, blast furnace slag), and
cell generating material. Includes precast units.
Fibre cement
Cement
Lime
Blast furnace slag/pulverised fly ash (PEA)
Mineral aggregates
Iron, steel and stainiess steel.
Not in finely divided form.
Copper and copper alloys
Not in finely divided form
152

Material
Notes
Zinc and zinc alloys
Not in finely divided form.
Aluminium and aluminium alloys
Not in finely divided form.
Lead
Not in finely divided form.
Gypsum and gypsum based plasters
May include additives (retarders, tillers, fibres,
pigments, hydrated lime, air and water retaining
agents and plasticisers), dense aggregates (e.g.
natural or crushed sand) or lightweight aggregates
(e.g. perlite or vermiculite).
Mortar with inorganic binding agents
Rendering/plastering mortars and mortars for floor
screeds based on one or more inorganic binding
agent(s), e.g. cement, lime, masonry cement and
gypsum.
Clay units
Units from clay or other argillaceous materials, with
or without sand, fuel or other additives. Includes
bricks, tiles paving and fireclay units (e.g. chimney
liners).
Calcium silicate units
Units made from a mixture of lime and natural
siliceous materials (sand, siliceous gravel or rock or
mixtures thereof). May include colouring pigments.
Natural stone and slate products
A worked or non-worked element produced from
natural stone (magmatic, sedimentary or
metamorphic rocks) or slate.
Gypsum unit
Includes blocks and other units of calcium sulphate
and water, that may incorporate fibres, fillers,
aggregates and other additives, and may be
coloured by pigments.
Terrazo
Includes precast concrete terrazotiles and in-situ
flooring.
Glass
Includes heat strengthened, chemically toughened,
laminated and wired glass.
Glass ceramics
Glass ceramics consisting of a crystalline and a
residual glass phase.
Ceramics
Includes dust-pressed and extruded products, glazed
or unglazed.
153

Appendix B
Fire Doors
General
used for all doors where restricted smoke leakage at
ambient temperatures is needed.
B1
A fire door is a door or shutter, provided for the
passage of persons, air or objects, which together with its
frame and furniture as installed in a building is intended
when closed to resist the passage of fire and/or gaseous
products of combustion, and is capable of meeting
specified performance criteria to those ends (see
definition of a fire door in Appendix D).
or
b) by their performance under test to BS 476: Part 22, in
terms of integrity for a period of minutes, eg FD30.  A
suffix (S) is added for doors where restricted smoke
leakage at ambient temperatures is needed.
Any reference to a fire door in this Technical Guidance
Document, or in any code of practice or other document
referred to in this Technical Guidance Document, is
intended to mean a complete door assembly which
includes the door leaf or leaves, the door frame,
ironmongery (hinges, latches, closers, etc.) and any seals
where required between the frame and leaf or between
leaves in the case of a twin-leaf door, and which is
installed in a building and is capable of meeting the
required performance.  The performance of a fire door
critically depends on the correct installation of the
complete door assembly, strictly in accordance with the
terms of the relevant test certification supplied by the
door manufacturer.
The method of test exposure in either case, is from each
side of the door separately, except in the case of lift doors
which are tested from the landing side only.
BS 8214: 1990 Code of Practice for fire door assemblies
with non-metallic leaves, makes recommendations relating
to the specification, design, manufacture, installation and
maintenance of timber fire doors.
Guidance on timber fire-resisting doorsets, in relation to
the new European test standard, may be found in “Timber
fire-resisting doorsets: maintaining performance under the
new European test standard” published by TRADA.
Guidance for metal doors is given in Code of Practice for
fire-resisting metal doorsets published by the DSMA
(Door and Shutter Manufactures Association) in 1999.
All fire doors should have the appropriate performance
given in Table B1 either
a) as determined with reference to Commission Decision
2000/367/EC of 3rd May 2000 implementing Council
Directive 89/106/EEC as regards the classification of the
resistance to fire performance of construction products,
construction works and parts thereof. All fire doors
should be classified in accordance with BS EN 13501-2:
2003, Fire classification of construction products and
building elements, Part 2 - Classification using data from
fire resistance tests (excluding products for use in
ventilation systems). They are tested to the relevant
European method from the following:
IMPORTANT NOTES:
1.
The year designation of xxxx is used for pending
European standards that are not yet  published.
2.
Until such time that the relevant harmonised
product standards are published, for the purposes of
meeting the Building Regulations, products tested in
accordance with I.S. EN 1634-1 (with or without pre-fire
test mechanical conditioning) will be deemed to have
satisfied the provisions provided that they achieve the
minimum fire resistance in terms of integrity, as detailed in
Table B1.
I.S. EN 1634-1: 2000, Fire resistance tests for door and
shutter assemblies, Part 1 - Fire doors and shutters;
Self-closing Devices
I.S. EN 1634-2: xxxx, Fire resistance tests for door and
shutter assemblies, Part 2 - Fire door hardware;
B2
All fire doors should be fitted with an automatic
self-closing device which is capable of closing the door
from any angle and against any latch fitted to the door.
I.S. EN 1634-3: 2004, Fire resistance tests for door and
shutter assemblies, Part 3 - Smoke control doors and
shutters.
Note: Fire doors to cupboards and to service ducts may
be normally kept locked shut in lieu of being fitted with a
self-closing device.
The performance requirement is in terms of integrity (E)
for a period of minutes. An additional classification of Sa is
154

B3
Where a self-closing device would be considered
a hindrance to the normal use of the building, fire doors
may be held open by:
5499: Part 5: 2002 (mandatory signs as set out in
Annex A of that document) according to whether
the door is:
(a) a fusible link (but not if the door is fitted in an
opening provided as a means of escape unless it
complies with paragraph B4 below); or
(i)
to be kept closed when not in use,
(ii)
to be kept locked when not in use, or
(b) an electro-magnetic or electro-mechanical device
which will automatically release the door on
activation of an adjacent smoke detector on the fire
alarm system, if the door can also be closed manually
and it is not to be -
(iii)
held open by an electro-magnetic or electro-
mechanical device.
Fire doors to cupboards and to service ducts should
be marked on the outside; all other fire doors on
both sides.
(i)
the only escape stairway serving a building (or
part of a building); or
(b)
The following fire doors are not required to comply
with (a) above;
(ii) a firefighting stairway; or
(i)
doors within dwelling houses,
(iii) an escape stairway serving a building in any
residential purpose group;
(ii)
doors to and within flats or maisonettes,
or
(iii)
bedroom doors in Other Residential (Purpose
Group 2(b)) premises, and
(c)
a door closure delay device.
(iv)
lift entrance doors.
B4
Two fire doors may be fitted in the same opening
so that the total fire resistance is the sum of their
individual fire resistances, provided that each door is
capable of closing the opening.  Where two fire doors are
fitted in the same opening that is provided as a means of
escape, one door may be fitted with an automatic self-
closing device and be held open by a fusible link if the
other door is capable of being easily opened by hand and
has at least 30 minutes fire resistance.
Identification
B7
All fire doors installed in a building should be
permanently identified in accordance with the
recommendations of BS 8214: 1990, to indicate the
period of fire resistance, the manufacturer, year of
manufacture, and other pertinent details.  Every fire door
(i.e. the complete fire door assembly) should be
supported by a fire test report and assessment from an
accredited laboratory (see Technical Guidance Document
D), which indicates that the complete assembly will meet
the required performance (see B1 above).
Fire Door Hardware
B5
Any hinge on which a fire door is hung should be
made entirely from non-combustible materials having a
melting point of at least 800º C. Hardware used on fire
doors can significantly affect performance in fire.
Notwithstanding the guidance in this Technical Guidance
Document, guidance is available in “Hardware for timber
and escape doors” published by the Builders Hardware
Industry Federation in 2000.
Performance
B8
Tables A1 and A2 of Appendix A sets out the
minimum periods of fire resistance for elements of
structure to which the performance of some doors is
linked.  Table A4 sets out limitations on the use of
uninsulated fire resisting glazed elements on escape
routes.
Fire Safety Signs
B6  
The following applies to the provision of fire
safety signs on fire doors:
(a)
Except for doors identified in (b) below, all fire
doors should be marked (at about eye level) with
the appropriate fire safety sign complying with BS
155

Table B1  
Provisions for fire doors
Position of door
Minimum fire resistance in terms  
of integrity (minutes) 
See notes (1 to 5) when tested to
European 
National
1. 
Within a separating wall 
E *Sa (min. 60) 
FD *S (min. 60)
2. 
Within a compartment wall – 
 
(a) 
 
    (i) if it separates a flat (other than an open plan flat), or maisonette, from 
                a space in common use:  
 
    (ii) if it separates an open plan flat from a space in common use:
E30 Sa 
 
E *Sa
FD 30S 
 
FD *S
(b) enclosing a protected shaft forming a stairway situated wholly or  partly  
 
     above the adjoining ground in a building used for flats, other residential, 
 
     assembly and recreation or office purposes,  
 
 
(c) enclosing a protected shaft forming a stairway not described in (b) above, 
 
 
(d) not described in (a), (b) or (c) above
E30 Sa
FD 30S 
 
 
 
FD + S (min. 30)
E + Sa (min 30)
E* (see Note 5)
FD* (see Note 5)
3.  
Within a compartment floor 
E *Sa 
FD *S
3. 
Forming part of the enclosures (which does not form a protected shaft) of a – 
 
(a) protected stairway (except where described in item 9  below);
E30 Sa
FD 30S
(b) lift shaft, or
E30
FD 30
(c) service shaft,
E30 Sa
FD 30S
5.  
Forming part of the enclosure of a - 
 
(a) a protected lobby approach (or corridor) to a stairway,
E30 Sa
FD 30S
(b) any other protected corridor,
E30 Sa
FD 30S
6.  
Affording access to an external escape route 
E30 
FD 30
7.  
Sub-dividing - 
 
(a) corridors connecting alternative exits,  
 
 
(b) dead-end portions of corridors from the remainder of the corridor
FD 30S
E30 Sa
E30 Sa
FD 30S
8.  
Any door - 
 
(a) within a cavity barrier,
E20
FD 20
(b) between a dwelling house and a garage
E30
FD 30
9.  
Any door - 
 
(a) forming part of the enclosures to a protected stairway in a dwelling 
 
     house, 
 
 
(b) forming part of the enclosures to a protected entrance hall or protected 
 
     landing in a flat or maisonette 
 
 
(c) within any other fire-resisting construction in a dwelling not described 
 
     elsewhere
E20 
 
 
E20 
 
 
E20
FD 20 
 
 
FD 20 
 
 
FD 20
Notes:
*
Period of fire resistance (see Table A1 of Appendix A) for the wall in which the door is situated.
+
Half the period of fire resistance (see Table A1 of Appendix A) for the wall in which the door is situated, but not less than 30 minutes.
S
Unless pressurisation techniques complying with I.S. EN 2101-6 are used, these doors should have a leakage rate not exceeding 3 m
2/hour (head and
jambs only) when tested at 25 Pa under BS 476: Section 31.1.
Sa
Unless pressurisation techniques complying with I.S. EN 2101-6 are used, these doors should also meet the additional classification requirement of Sa
when tested in accordance with I.S. EN 1634-3: 2004.
(1)
To BS 476: Part 22: 1987 (or BS 476: Part 8 subject to paragraph A5 of Appendix A).
(2)
Method of exposure is from each side separately (except for doors to lift shafts, which is from the landing side only).
(3)
Two fire-resisting doors may be fitted in an opening if each door by itself is capable of closing the opening and the two doors together achieve the
required level of fire resistance.
(4)
See also Appendix A, Table A4, for limitation on use of uninsulated glazed elements.
(5)
FD*S if the door is in a compartment wall used for horizontal evacuation in a hospital (see B1, 1.2.7).
156

Appendix C
Methods of Measurement
Methods of Measurement
C1
Some form of measurement is an integral
part of many of the provisions in this Document.
Diagrams 34 to 38 show how the various forms of
measurement should be made, based on definitions
in Appendix D.
Note:
See Section B1, par. 1.0.10 for methods of
measurement specific to means of escape in case of
fire.
Diagram 34
Measurement of areas
Par. C1
If a lean-to
roof measure
from face of
wall
Outer point of
roof at eaves
or verge
Outer point
of roof
Highest point
of roof slope
Lowest point
of roof slope
at eaves
If a hipped
roof measure
to outer
point of roof
as base area
Verge
SECTION
SECTION
ELEVATION
1. Flat or monopitch roof
2. Double pitch roof
Roof sheeting
Door or
window
Rooflight
SECTION
PLAN
PLAN
3. Rooflight:
4. Floor area:
5. Floor area:
Surface area of roofs
and rooflights:
in each case measure
the visible area.
Floor area of room,
garage, conservatory or
outbuilding:
measure to inner
surface of enclosing
walls.
Floor area of storey part or compartment:
measure to inner surface of enclosing walls
and include internal walls and partitions.
When there is not an enclosing outside
wall, measure to the outermost edge of the
floor slab.
157

Diagram 35
Cubic capacity
Par. C1
1.
CUBIC CAPACITY OF BUILDING
2.
CUBIC CAPACITY OF A COMPARTMENT
Measure
Measure
- to upper side of lowest floor
- to lower side of roof
- to inner surface of enclosing walls or, 
where there is not an enclosing outside 
wall, to the outermost edge of the floor
- to lower side of compartment floor over
- to upper side of compartment floor below
- to inner surface of compartment walls
KEY
Partition
Compartment wall or floor
158

Diagram 36
Number of storeys Par. C1
To count the number of storeys in a building or in a
separated part of a building:
count only at the position which gives the greatest
number and exclude any basement storeys.
Building 3 storeys
2
Height
1
G
Mean ground level 1.2 m max
Basement
Separated part 3 storeys
Separated part 2 storeys
2
Height
Height
1
G
Mean ground level 1.2 m max
Basement
Note
For definition of storey see 1.0.9.
For definition of separated part see Appendix D.
159

Diagram 37
Height of a building
Par. C1
Highest point of 
roof space
Highest point of 
flat roof
Highest point of
parapet (including
coping)
Equal
Mean roof level
Mean roof level
Equal
Top level
of gutter
Lowest point of
roof slope
Height of 
building
Height B
Height A
Highest level of
ground adjacent
to outside walls
Mean ground level
Equal
Equal
Mean ground level
Use height A or height B whichever is greater
Lowest level of 
ground adjacent
to outside walls
1.
DOUBLE PITCH ROOF
2.
MANSARD TYPE ROOF
Highest point of 
roof space
Mean roof level
Equal
Mean roof level
Equal
Lowest
point
of roof
slope
Highest level of
ground adjacent
to outside walls
Height
Highest level of
ground adjacent
to outside walls
Height
Equal
Equal
Mean ground level
Equal
Equal
Mean ground level
Lowest level of 
ground adjacent
to outside walls
Lowest level of 
ground adjacent
to outside walls
4.
FLAT ROOF
3.
MONOPITCH ROOF
Diagram 38
Height of top storey and depth of a basement
Par. C1
Plant
Roof
Height of top storey excludes
roof-top plant areas
Height of top storey
measured from upper
floor surface of top
floor to ground level on
lowest side of building
Highest level of ground
adjacent to outside walls
Depth of a basement
160

Appendix D
Definitions
Definitions
Concealed space (cavity)  -  See B3 (3.0.5)
Access room  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Conservatory  -  See B4 (4.0.2)
Dead-end  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Access level  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Accommodation stairway  -  See B1(1.0.9)
Direct distance  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Alternative escape routes  -  See B1(1.0.9)
Dwelling  -  A single-family dwelling house, a flat or
maisonette
Appliance ventilation duct  -  See B3 (3.0.5)
Electro-magnetic, or electro-mechanical
device susceptible to smoke  -  A device which
will allow a door held open by it to close
automatically in the event of each or any one of the
following:
Atrium (plural atria)  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Basement storey  -  means a storey which is
below the ground storey or, where there is no
ground storey, means a storey the top surface of the
floor of which is situated at such a level or levels that
some point on its perimeter is more than 1.2 m
below the level of the finished surface of the ground
adjoining the building in the vicinity of that point
(however, see Appendix A, Table A2, for
concessions where the storey is considered to be a
basement only because of a sloping site)
(a)
detection of smoke by automatic apparatus
suitable in nature, quality and location, and
(b)
operation of a manually operated switch fitted
in a suitable position, and
(c)
failure of the electricity supply to the device,
apparatus or switch, and
Bedroom  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
(d)
operation of the fire alarm system, if any.
Boundary  -  See B4 (4.0.2)
Element of structure -
Cavity  -  See B2 (2.0.7)
(a) a member forming part of the structural frame of
a building or any other beam or column, and
Cavity Barrier  -  See B3 (3.0.5)
Ceiling  -  See B2 (2.0.7)
(b) a loadbearing wall or loadbearing part of a wall,
and
Circulation space  -  See B2 (2.0.7)
(c) a floor, and
Class O  -  See Appendix A, paragraph A11
(d) a gallery, and
Compartment (fire compartment)  -  A building or
part of a building, comprising one or more rooms,
spaces or storeys, constructed to prevent the spread
of fire to or from another part of the same building,
or an adjoining building (a roof space above the top
storey of a compartment is included in that
compartment) (see also 'Separated Part')
(e) an external wall, and
(f) a compartment wall (including a separating wall).
However, see B3, par. 3.1.4, for exclusions from the
provisions for elements of structure
Compartment wall/floor  -  A fire-resisting
wall/floor used in the separation of one fire
compartment from another (constructional
requirements are given in 3.2 of Section B3)
Emergency lighting  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Escape lighting  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
161

Escape route  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Habitable room  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Evacuation lift  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Height (of a building or storey)  -  (or of part of
a building which is completely separated throughout,
both below and above ground, by a compartment
wall or compartment walls in the same continuous
vertical plane) means the height of such building or
part measured from the mean level of the ground
adjoining the outside of the external wall of the
building to the level of half the vertical height of the
roof of the building or part, or to the top of the
walls or of the parapet (if any), whichever is the
higher (see Diagram 37 of Appendix C)
External wall  -  See B4 (4.0.2)
Final exit  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Fire door  -  A door or shutter, provided for the
passage of persons, air or objects, which together
with its frame and furniture as installed in a building
is intended when closed to resist the passage of fire
and/or gaseous products of combustion, and is
capable of meeting specified performance criteria to
those ends (it may have one or more leaves and
includes a cover or other form of protection to an
opening in a fire-resisting wall or floor, or in a
structure surrounding a protected shaft)
Inner room  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Maisonette  -  A dwelling forming part of a larger
building, which has its rooms divided between two
or more levels which are more than half a storey
height apart
Firefighting lift  -  See B5 (5.0.4)
Firefighting lobby  -  See B5 (5.0.4)
Materials of limited combustibility  -  See
Appendix A, paragraph A16 17 and Table A7
Firefighting shaft  -  See B5 (5.0.4)
Means of escape  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Firefighting stairway  -  See B5 (5.0.4)
Measurement  -  (For area, cubic capacity, height
of a building and number of storeys) - See Appendix
C, Diagrams 34 to 38. For occupant capacity,
seatway, travel distance and width of a doorway,
escape route and a stairway - See B1, paragraph
1.0.10
Fire mains  -  See B5 (5.0.5)
Fire stop  -  See B3 (3.0.5)
Flat  -  Separate and self-contained premises
constructed or adopted for residential use and
forming part of a building from some other part of
which it is divided horizontally.
Non-combustible  -  See Appendix A, paragraph
A17 18 and Table A8
Floor area  -  In relation to a building means the
area bounded by the inner finished surfaces of the
enclosing walls, or, on any side where there is no
enclosing wall, by the outermost edge of the floor on
that side and in calculating the area of a building or
part of a building there shall be included in such area
the space occupied by any walls, shafts, ducts or
structure within the area being measured (see
Diagram 34 of Appendix C)
Notional boundary  -  See B4 (4.0.2)
Open spatial planning  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Perimeter (of Building)  -  See B5 (5.0.4)
Pipe (for the purposes of B3) -  See B3 (3.0.5)
Place of safety  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Gallery  -  A floor, including a raised storage area,
which is less than one-half of the area of the space
into which it projects
Places of special fire risk  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Platform floor  -  See B3 (3.0.5)
Hydrant  -  See B5 (5.0.4)
Pressurization  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
162

Protected corridor/escape route lobby  -  See
B1 (1.0.9)
Width of a doorway  -  is the clear width when
the door or doors are open (See Figure 1 -B1(1.09))
Protected shaft  -  A shaft which enables persons,
air or objects to pass from one compartment to
another and is enclosed with fire-resisting
construction
Protected stairway  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Purpose group  -  See Section B0 paragraph 0.3.2,
and Table 0.1
Relevant boundary  -  See B4 (4.0.2)
Rooflight  -  See B2 (2.0.7) or B4 (4.0.2)
Room  -  See B2 (2.0.7)
Separated part (of a building)  -  A form of
compartmentation that is a part which is separated
from another part of the same building by a
compartment wall which runs full height of the part
and is in one plane (see Appendix C, Diagram 36)
Separating wall  -  See B3 (3.0.5)
Single storey building  -  A building consisting of a
ground storey or a basement storey only.
(a separated part which consists of a ground storey
only, with a roof to which access is just for repair or
maintenance, may be treated as a part of a single
storey building).  See Appendix C, Diagram 36 for
number of storeys in a building or separated part
Storey  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Storey exit  -  See Bl (1.0.9)
Suspended ceiling (fire protecting)  -  See
Appendix A, Table A3, for different types
Thermoplastic material  -  See Appendix A,
paragraph A14
Travel distance  -  See B1 (1.0.9)
Unprotected area  -  See B4 (4.0.2)
Wall  -  (for the purpose of B2) See B2 (2.0.7)
163

Appendix E
Assessment of Risk in Industrial and Storage
Buildings
Assessment of Fire Risk and Associated
Life Risk
many industrial and storage buildings there will be a
mixture of risks. It is emphasised that all factors
should be considered.
E1
As premises covered by this Document can
vary greatly in size and layout, the risk of fire can
also vary considerably from one situation to another,
particularly in industrial and storage buildings where
widely differing processes may be carried out and
hazardous substances are stored or used. It is
essential, therefore, that the fire precautions to be
provided should be determined having regard to all
relevant circumstances.
At the building design stage, it may be difficult to
determine the exact nature of the processes or
storage involved.  However, the basis for the
assessment should always be established in order to
provide for adequate fire safety measures.
Attention is drawn to obligations under the Fire
Services Acts, 1981 and 2003 and the Safety, Health
and Welfare at Work Act, 2005. The measures to be
provided under the Building Regulations are intended
to cater for fire safety in buildings generally and may
not be adequate for the range of process and
industrial hazards that could arise when the building
is in use.  The measures provided may therefore
need to be supplemented accordingly.
For the purpose of the guidance in this Document,
two categories of risk are used for industrial and
storage buildings.  These are described as:
Industrial (Purpose Group 6)
(a)
normal risk, and
Assessment of High Risk
(b)
high risk.
E2
Factors which lead to the assessment of
premises or parts of the premises as being of high
risk include the following:-
Storage (Purpose Group 7(a))
(a)
normal risk, and
(a)
the presence of materials likely, when ignited, to
cause the rapid spread of fire, smoke or fumes.
The materials may be solid, liquid, or gaseous
and as well as the normal forms may be present
as dust, spray, mist or vapour;
(b)
high risk.
Industrial and storage buildings for the purpose of
the relevant guidance should be treated as "normal
risk" unless identified, by reasons of the criteria
outlined in this Appendix, as being "high risk".
(b)
the presence of highly flammable or explosive
materials (other than in small quantities);
It should be noted that it is not possible to set out
precise rules or other criteria that will be adequate
to clearly establish the risk category in all cases. It is
possible, however, to describe in broad terms the
kind of factors which will need to be considered to
determine if a building can be described as "high
risk".
(c)
certain areas which, due to their function, may
present a greater risk of fire occurring and
developing 
than 
elsewhere 
such 
as
manufacturing processes handling highly
flammable liquids;
(d)
the storage of hazardous goods or materials and
the storage of vehicles containing hazardous
goods or materials;
The details contained in the following paragraphs
should be treated as broad indicators. It does not
necessarily follow that the presence (or indeed the
absence) of one of the factors mentioned in the
description of the "high risk" category inevitably
means that the premises or part of the premises
have to be placed in that category.  It is likely that in
(e)
manufacturing, processing, repairing, cleaning,
washing, breaking up or otherwise treating any
hazardous substance.
164

Hazardous Materials
E3
Materials falling within the following general
descriptions should be considered as hazardous
materials:
(i)
Explosives;
(ii)
Compressed or liquified gases;
(iii)
Flammable liquids with a flash point below
65°C including whisky or other spirituous
liquor;
(iv)
Substances which becomes dangerous by
interaction with either water or air;
(v)
Corrosive substances;
(vi)
Oxidising agents;
(vii)
Substances liable to spontaneous combustion;
(viii)
Substance that changes or decomposes readily
giving out heat when doing so;
(ix)
Combustible solid substance with a flash point
less than 120°C;
(x)
Any substance likely to spread fire by flowing
from one part of a building to another.
The above list is not necessarily exhaustive.  There
are a number of classification systems for hazardous
materials such as the U.S Department of Transport
(DOT) or that produced by the United Nations
Committee of Experts for the Transport of
Dangerous Goods which may also be used for this
purpose.
165

Appendix F
Reference Standards
Standards referred to in B0
Part 10: 1991
Code of practice for shopping complexes
BS 7974: 2001
Application of fire safety engineering principles to
the design of buildings and associated Published
Documents (PD’s) Numbered 0-7
Part II: 1997
Code of Practice for shops, offices, industrial,
storage and other similar buildings
Standards referred to in Bl
British Standards Institution
BS 5720: 1979
Code of practice for mechanical ventilation and air
conditioning in buildings
BS 5306  
Fire extinguishing installations and equipment on
premises
BS 5839
Fire detection and alarm systems for buildings
Part 1: 1976
Hydrant systems, hose reels and foam inlets
Part 1: 2002  
Code of practice for system design, installation and
servicing
Part 2: 1990
Specification for sprinkler systems
Part 6: 2004
Code of practice for the design and installation of
fire detection and alarm systems in dwellings
BS 5395
Stairs, ladder and walkways
Part 2: 1984
Code of Practice for the design of helical and spiral
stairs
BS 5906: 1980 (1987)
Code of practice for storage and on-site treatment
of solid waste from buildings
BS 5499 
Graphical symbols and sign – safety signs, including
fire safety signs.
BS 5925: 1991
Code of practice for ventilation principles and
designing for natural ventilation
Part 5: 2002
Signs with specific safety meanings.
BS 6387: 1994
Specification for performance requirements for
cables required to maintain circuit integrity under
fire conditions
BS 5588
Fire precautions in the design, construction and use
of buildings
BS 9251:2014
Fire sprinkler systems for domestic and residential 
occupancies – Code of practice
Part 1: 1990 
Code of practice for residential buildings
I.S. EN 12101-6: 2005
Smoke and heat control systems.  Specification for
pressure differential systems.  Kits
Part 6: 1991
Code of practice for places of assembly
Part 7: 1997
Code of practice for the incorporation of Atria into
Buildings
National Standards Authority of Ireland
I.S. EN 1125: 1997
Building Hardware. Panic exit devices operated by a
horizontal bar. Requirements and test methods.
Part 8: 1999
Code of practice for means of escape for disabled
people
I.S. 3217 : 1989
Code of practice for emergency lighting
Part 9: 1999
Code of practice for ventilation and air conditioning
ductwork
I.S. 3218: 1989
Fire Detection and Alarm Systems
166

Part 9: 1999
Code of practice for ventilation and air-conditioning
ductwork
I.S. EN 671
Fixed fire fighting systems
Part 1: 1995  Hose reels with semi-rigid hose
Part 10: 1991
Code of practice for shopping complexes
I.S. CEN TS 54: Fire detection and alarm systems
Standards referred to in B4
Part 14: 2004
Guidelines for planning, design, installation,
commissioning, use and maintenance.
British Standards Institution
BS 476
Fire tests on building materials and structures
Standards referred to in B2
British Standards Institution
Part 3: 2004
Classification and method of test for external fire
exposure to roofs.
BS 476
Fire tests on building materials and structures
Part 6: 1989
Method of test for fire propogation for products
Standards referred to in B5
British Standards Institution
Part 7: 1987 (1993) AMD 7612
Method for the classification of the surface 
spread of flame of products
BS 336: 1989 
Specification for fire hose couplings and ancillary
equipment
BS 2782
Methods of testing plastics
BS 750: 1984
Specification for underground fire hydrants and
surface box frames and covers
BS 5438: 1976 AMD 3595
Methods of test for flammability of vertically
oriented textile fabrics and fabric assemblies subject
to a small igniting flame
BS 3251: 1976(1993) AMD 6736
Specification Indicator plates for fire hydrants and
emergency water supplies
Standards referred to in B3
BS 5306
Fire extinguishing installations and equipment on
premises
British Standards Institution
BS 4514: 1983 AMD 4517;  AMD 5584
Specification for unplasticized PVC soil and
ventilating pipes, fittings and accessories
Part 1: 1976
Hydrant systems, hose reels and foam inlets
BS 5255: 1989
Specification for plastic waste pipe and fittings
BS 5588
Fire precautions in the design, construction and use
of buildings
BS 5306
Fire extinguishing installations and equipment on
premises
Part 5: 2004
Code of practice for firefighting stairways and lifts.
Part 2: 1990
Specification for sprinkler systems
BS 5588
Fire precautions in the design, construction and use
of buildings
167

Standards 
referred 
to 
in
Appendix A
BS 2782: Part 1
Thermal properties
Methods 120A to 120E: 1976
Determination of the Vicat softening temperature of
thermoplastics
British Standards Institution
BS 476
Fire tests on building materials and structures
Method 508A
Performs so that the test flame extinguishes before
the first mark, and the duration of flaming or
afterglow does not exceed 5 seconds following
removal of the burner
Part 3: 2004
Classification and method of test for external fire
exposure to roofs.
Part 4: 1970 (1984)
Non-combustibility test for materials
BS 5306: Part 2: 1990
Specification for sprinkler systems
Part 6: 1968
Fire propagation test for materials
BS 6336: 1982
Guide to development and presentation of fire tests
and their use in hazard assessment
Part 6: 1981 (1989)
Method of test for fire propagation for products
PD 6520: 1988
Guide to fire test methods for building materials and
elements of construction
Part 7: 1987 AMD 6249; AMD 7030;  AMD 7612
Surface spread of flame tests for materials
National Standards Authority of Ireland
Part 11: 1982 (1988)
Method for assessing the heat emission from building
products
I.S. 325: Part 2: 1995
Code of Practice for the use of masonry, Part 2.
Masonry construction
Part 20: 1987 AMD 6487
Method for determination of the fire resistance of
elements of construction (general principles)
IMPORTANT NOTE:
The year designation of xxxx is used for pending
European standards that are not yet published.
Part 21: 1987
Methods for determination of the fire resistance of
loadbearing elements of construction
European test methods and classifications
(Reaction to fire)
Part 22: 1987
Methods for determination of the fire resistance of
non-loadbearing elements of construction
I.S. EN ISO 1182: 2002
Reaction to fire tests for building products - Non-
combustibility test
Part 23: 1987
Methods for determination of the contribution of
components to the fire resistance of a structure
I.S. EN ISO 1716: 2002
Reaction to fire tests for building products -
Determination of the gross calorific value
Part 24: 1987
Method for determination of the fire resistance of
ventilation ducts
I.S. EN 13823: 2002
Reaction to fire tests for building products - Building
products excluding floorings exposed to the thermal
attack by a single burning item
BS 2782
Methods of testing plastics
168

I.S. EN ISO 11925-2: 2002
Reaction to fire tests for building Products, Part 2 -
Ignitability when subjected to direct impingement of
a flame
I.S. EN 1364-1: 1999
Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements,
Part 1 - Walls
I.S. EN 1364-2: 1999
Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements,
Part 2 - Ceilings
I.S. EN 13238: 2001
Reaction to fire tests for building products-
conditioning procedures and general rules for
selection of substrates
I.S. EN 1364-3: xxxx
Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements,
Part 3 - Curtain walls - full configuration
I.S. EN 13501-1: 2002
Fire classification of construction products and
building elements, Part 1 - Classification using data
from reaction to fire tests
I.S. EN 1364-4: 1999
Fire resistance tests for loadbearing elements, Part 4
- Columns
European test methods and classifications
(Fire resistance)
I.S. EN 1364-5: xxxx
Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements,
Part 5 - Semi-natural fire test for facades and curtain
walls
I.S. EN 13501-2: 2003
Fire classification of construction products and
building elements, Part 2 - Classification using data
from fire resistance tests (excluding ventilation
services)
I.S. EN 1364-6: xxxx
Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements,
Part 6 - External wall systems
I.S. EN 13501-3: xxxx
Fire classification of construction products and
building elements, Part 3 - Classification using data
from fire resistance tests on components of normal
building service installations (other than smoke
control systems)
I.S. EN 1365-1: 1999
Fire resistance tests for loadbearing elements, Part 1
- Walls
I.S. EN 1365-2: 1999
Fire resistance tests for loadbearing elements, Part 2
- Floors and roofs
I.S. EN 13501-4: xxxx
Fire classification of construction products and
building elements, Part 4 - “Classification using data
from fire resistance tests on smoke control
systems.”
I.S. EN 1365-3: 1999
Fire resistance tests for loadbearing elements, Part 3
- Beams
I.S. EN 1363-1: 1999
Fire resistance tests, Part 1 -General requirements
I.S. EN 1365-4: 1999
Fire resistance tests for loadbearing elements, Part 4
- Columns
I.S. EN 1363-2: 1999
Fire resistance tests, Part 2 -Alternative and
additional procedures
I.S. EN 1365-5: 2004
Fire resistance tests for loadbearing elements, Part 5
- Balconies and walkways
DD ENV 1363-3: 1999
Fire resistance tests, Part 3 -Verification of furnace
performance
I.S. EN 1365-6: 2004
Fire resistance tests for loadbearing elements, Part 6
- Stairs
169

I.S. EN 1366-1: 1999
Fire resistance tests for service installations, Part 1 -
Ducts
I.S. EN 1634-3: 2004
Fire resistance tests for door and shutter assemblies,
Part 3 - Smoke control doors and shutters
I.S. EN 1366-2: 1999
Fire resistance tests for service installations, Part 2 -
Fire dampers
European test methods and classifications
(External fire exposure of roofs)
I.S. ENV 1187: 2002
Test methods for external fire exposure to roofs.
I.S. EN 1366-3: 2004
re
Fire 
sistance tests for service installations, Part 3 -
Penetration seals
I.S. EN 13501-5: xxxx
Fire classification of construction products and
building elements,  Part 5 - Classification using test
data from external fire exposure to roof tests.
I.S. EN 1366-4: xxxx
Fire resistance tests for service installations, Part 4 -
Linear joint seals
Standards 
referred 
to 
in
Appendix B
I.S. EN 1366-5: 2003
Fire resistance tests for service installations, Part 5 -
Service ducts and shafts
British Standards Institution
I.S. EN 1366-6: 2004
Fire resistance tests for service installations, Part 6 -
Raised access and hollow core floors
BS 476
Fire tests on building materials and structures
Part 22: 1987
Methods for determination of the fire resistance of
non-loadbearing elements of construction
I.S. EN 1366-7: 2004
Fire resistance tests for service installations, Part 7 -
Conveyor systems and their closures
Section 31.1: 1983 
Methods of measuring smoke penetration through
doorsets and shutter assemblies. Measurement
under ambient temperature conditions
I.S. EN 1366-8: 2004
Fire resistance tests for service installations, Part 8 -
Smoke extraction ducts
BS 5499
Graphical symbols and signs, safety signs, including
fire safety signs
I.S. EN 1366-9: xxxx
Fire resistance tests for service installations, Part 9 -
Single compartment smoke extraction ducts
Part 5: 2002: Signs with specific safety meanings
I.S. EN 1366-10: xxxx
Fire resistance tests for service installations, Part 10
- Smoke control dampers
I.S. EN 12101-6
Smoke and heat control systems. Specifications for
pressure differential systems, kits
I.S. EN 1634-1: 2000
Fire resistance tests for door and shutter assemblies,
Part 1 - Fire doors and shutters
BS 8214: 1990
Code of Practice for fire door assemblies with non-
metallic leaves
I.S. EN 1634-2: xxxx
Fire resistance tests for door and shutter assemblies,
Part 2 - Fire door hardware
170

Appendix G
Reference Publications
Other Publications referred to
DOEHLG Publications
B0
*
Code of Practice for the Management of Fire
Safety in Places of Assembly
*
CIBSE Guide E – Fire Engineering and
Introduction to fire safety engineering of
structures published by the Chartered Institution
of Building Services Engineers, 222 Balham High
Road, Balham, London SW12 9BS.
*
Code of Practice for Fire Safety of Furnishings
and Fittings in Places of Assembly
*
Code of Practice for Safety in Indoor Concerts
*
The SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection
Engineering 3rd Edition.  The Society of Fire
Protection Engineers, 7315 Wisconsin Avenue,
Suite 620E, Bethesdam MD 20814 USA
*
Guide to fire Precautions in Existing Hotels,
Guesthouses and Similar Premises
*
Guide to Fire Safety in Guest Accommodation
*
Mathematical fire modelling and its application
to fire safety design. Building Research
Establishment (BR 223)
*
Guide to Fire Safety in Existing Nursing Homes
and Similar Type Premises
*
Fire Safety in Hostels
*
Fire Modelling.  Building Research Establishment,
(Digest 367)
*
Guide to Fire Safety in Flats, Bedsitters and
Apartments
*
Fire Models: a Guide for Fire Prevention
Officers.  Home Office Fire Research and
Development Group (6/93)
*
Fire Safety in Pre-Schools
These may be purchased through the Government
Publications Sale Office and are available on the
Department’s web site: www.environ.ie under
Publications.
*
Architectural, Heritage Protection Guidelines for
Planning Authorities Chapter 6 (page 89) and
Chapter 17 published by the Heritage Section
DEHLG 2005
Bl
*
Fire protection in old buildings and historic town
centres.  The Fire Protection Association,
London
*
S.I. No. 249 of 1985 Fire Safety in Places of
Assembly (Ease of Escape) Regulations
*
Fire protection measures for the Royal Palaces
(The Bailey Report).  Department of National
Heritage, London
*
Technical Guidance Document J - Heat
Producing Appliances
*
Technical Guidance Document K - Stairways,
Ladders, Ramps and Guards
*
Heritage under fire.  A guide to the protection of
historic buildings.  The United Kingdom Working
Party on fire safety in historic buildings
*
Technical Guidance Document M - Access for
People with Disabilities
*
Ensuring best practise for passive fire protection
(PFP) systems in buildings. Association of
Specialist Fire Protection (ASFP) (available from
ASFP, Association House, 99 West Street,
Farnham, Surrey, GU9 7EN, UK)
*
Design principles for smoke ventilation in
enclosed shopping centres. BRE, [1990].
(Revision of Smoke control methods in enclosed
shopping complexes of one or more storeys. A
design summary. (BRE) HMSO, 1979)
*
Firecode Health Technical Memorandum 81, Fire
Precautions in new hospitals, 1996
171

*
Firecode Health Technical Memorandum 92,
Alarm and detection systems, 1996
*
Increasing the fire resistance of existing timber
floors. Building Research Establishment (Digest
208)
*
Building Bulletin 7. Fire and the design of
educational buildings. Department of Education
and Science (United Kingdom) HMSO, 1988
*
Fire Grading of Buildings, Part 1. General
Principles and Structural Precautions. Post-War
Building Studies No. 20. HMSO, 1946
*
National Rules for electrical installations (ET
101).  The Electro Technical Council of Ireland
*
Rules for the construction and installation of
firebreak doors and shutters. LPC, 1988
(available from LPC, BRE, Bucknalls Lane,
Garston, Watford, Herts, WD25 9XX, UK)
*
Fire Services Acts, 1981 and 2003
*
Licensing of Indoor Events Act, 2003
*
Fire protection for structural steel in buildings
(third edition P013) ISBN 1870409205
ASFPCM/SCI/FTSG 2002 (available from ASFP,
Association House, 99 West Street, Farnham,
Surrey, GU9 7EN, UK and the Steel
Construction Institute, Silwood Park, Ascot,
Berks, SL5 7QN, UK)
*
Safety, Health and Welfare at Work Act, 2005
*
S.I. No. 132 of 1995.  Safety, Health and Welfare
at Work (Signs) Regulations, 1995
B2
*
Code of Practice for Fire Safety of Furnishings
and Fittings in Places of Assembly.  Department
of the Environment
Appendix B
*
Hardware for timber and escape doors 2000
(available from The Builders Hardware Industry
Federation, 42 Heath Street, Tamworth, Staffs,
B79 7JH, UK)
B3
*
Design principles for smoke ventilation in
enclosed shopping centres. Building Research
Establishment (BR 186)
Code of Practice for Fire Resisting metal
doorsets 1999 (available from DSMA, 42 Heath
Street, Tamworth, Staffs, B79 7JH, UK)
*
Design approaches for smoke control in atrium
buildings, Building Research Establishment
(BR 258)
Timber and fire-resisting doorsets: maintaining
performance under the new European test
standard TRADA, (available from TRADA
Technology Ltd, Stocking Lane, Hughenden
Valley, High Wycombe, Bucks, HP14 4ND, UK
B4
*
External fire spread: building separation and
boundary distances. Building Research
Establishment,  (BR 187)
*
Single storey steel frame buildings in fire
boundary conditions (P313) ISBN 1859421350
(available from the Steel Construction Institute,
Silwood Park, Ascot, Berks, SL5 7QN UK)
Appendix A
*
Guidelines for the construction of fire-resisting
structural elements. Building Research
Establishment (BR 128)
172

173

housing.gov.ie
Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government