Building Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2012
Guidance
Department of
Finance and
Personnel
www.dfpni.gov.uk
Technical
Booklet
E
Fire safety
October 2012

Contents
page
Introduction
4
Technical Booklets
4
This Technical Booklet
4
Protected buildings
5
Other legislation
5
Commission guidance papers and decisions
6
Part E Regulations
8
Guidance – Performance and introduction to provisions
10
Means of escape
10
Internal fire spread – Linings
13
Internal fire spread – Structure
13
External fire spread
15
Facilities and access for the Fire and Rescue Service
16
Use of this Technical Booklet
17
Section 1
General
18
Definitions
18
General guidance
24
Non-combustible materials
25
Materials of limited combustibility
26
Classification
26
Alternative approaches
27
Section 2
Means of escape
28
Dwellinghouses
28
Introduction
28
Common provisions
28
Roof space conversions
33
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety
1

Automatic fire detection and fire alarm systems in dwellinghouses
35
Flats
37
Means of escape
37
Automatic fire detection and fire alarm systems in flats
37
Buildings other than dwellings
38
Horizontal part of the escape route
38
Vertical part of the escape route
51
General provisions
66
Section 3
Internal fire spread - Linings
74
Classification of performance of materials or products
74
(National classification)
Classification of performance of materials or products
76
(European classification)
Performance of wall and ceiling linings
77
Section 4
Internal fire spread - Structure
81
Tests for fire resistance
81
Fire resistance of elements of structure and certain other components of the
building
87
Compartmentation
93
Protected shafts between compartments
98
Fire doors
100
Provision of cavity barriers
104
Pipes penetrating fire separating elements
112
Car parks for light vehicles
116
Shopping complexes
118
Insulating core panels used for internal structures
119
Section 5
External fire spread
123
Construction of external walls
123
Space separation - External walls
126
Provisions for and calculation of space separation and unprotected areas
130
Canopies
139
Roofs
140
2
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Section 6
Facilities and access for the Fire and Rescue Service
147
Firefighting shafts
147
Venting of heat and smoke from basements
150
Rolling shutters in compartment walls
152
Vehicle access
152
Appendix A
Purpose Groups
155
Appendix B
Rules for measurement
157
Appendix C
Publications referred to
161
3
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Introduction
Technical Booklets
This Technical Booklet, which takes effect on 31st October 2012, is one of a
series that has been prepared by the Department of Finance and Personnel
(the Department) for the purpose of providing practical guidance with
respect to the technical requirements of the Building Regulations (Northern
Ireland) 2012 (the Building Regulations).
At the back of each Technical Booklet is a list of all the Technical Booklets
that have been prepared and published by the Department for this purpose.
The guidance given in a Technical Booklet includes performance standards
and design provisions relating to compliance with specific aspects of the
Building Regulations for the more common building situations.
If the guidance in a Technical Booklet is followed there will be a presumption
of compliance with the requirements of those Building Regulations covered
by that guidance. However, this presumption can be overturned, so simply
following the guidance does not guarantee compliance. For example, if a
particular circumstance is not one of the more common building situations
the design provisions given in the Technical Booklet may not be appropriate.
There are likely to be alternative ways of demonstrating compliance
with the relevant requirements of the Building Regulations other than
by following a design provision given in a Technical Booklet.There is
therefore no obligation to adopt any particular provision set out in a
Technical Booklet, should you decide to comply in some other way.
However, you will have to demonstrate that your alternative solution
meets the relevant requirements of the Building Regulations by those
other means.
This Technical Booklet
Requirements
The guidance contained in this Technical Booklet relates only to the
requirements of regulations 33, 34, 35, 36 and 37. The work will also have to
comply with all other relevant requirements of the Building Regulations.
Materials and workmanship
Any building work which is subject to requirements imposed by Part A of the
Building Regulations should be carried out in accordance with regulation 23
of those regulations. Guidance on meeting these requirements for materials
and workmanship is given in Technical Booklet B which supports Part B.
4
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

The Building Regulations are made for specific purposes, primarily securing
the health, safety, welfare and convenience of people and for the
conservation of fuel and power. Standards and technical approvals are
relevant guidance to the extent that they relate to these purposes. However,
they may also address other aspects of performance such as serviceability,
or aspects which although they relate to health and safety are not covered
by the Building Regulations.
Named standards
Where this Technical Booklet makes reference to a named standard, the
relevant version of the standard is the one listed in Appendix C. However, if
this version has been replaced or updated by the issuing standards body,
the new version may be used as a source of guidance provided that it
continues to address the relevant requirements of the Building Regulations.
Diagrams
The diagrams in this Technical Booklet supplement the text. They do not
show all the details of construction and are not intended to illustrate
compliance with any other requirement of the Building Regulations. They are
not necessarily to scale and should not be used as working details.
Protected buildings
District councils have a duty to take account of the desirability to preserve
the character of protected buildings when carrying out their functions under
Building Regulations. Therefore, where work is to be carried out to a
protected building to comply with Part E or any other Part of the Building
Regulations, special consideration may be given to the extent of such work
for compliance where it would unacceptably alter the character or
appearance of the building. Protected buildings are defined in Article 3A(2)
of the Building Regulations (Northern Ireland) Order 1979 (as amended).
Other legislation
The provisions of this Technical Booklet relate to the requirements of
Building Regulations and do not include measures which may be necessary
to meet the requirements of other legislation. Such other legislation may
operate during the design or construction stages or when a building is
brought into use and can extend to cover aspects which are outside the
scope of the Building Regulations.
The Fire and Rescue Services (Northern Ireland) Order 2006
The main legislation in this area is the Fire and Rescue Services (Northern
Ireland) Order 2006 and the associated Fire Safety Regulations (Northern
Ireland) 2010. This legislation imposes a general duty to take such fire
precautions as may be reasonably required to ensure that relevant premises
are safe for the occupants and those in the immediate vicinity. By virtue of
this legislation certain duty holders are required to carry out and continually
review a fire risk assessment of the workplace and the relevant premises.
5
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

The Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations (Northern
Ireland) 1993
The Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations (Northern Ireland)
1993 (the Workplace Regulations) contain some requirements which affect
building design. The main requirements are now covered by the Building
Regulations, but for further information see – The Workplace Regulations
and the Workplace Health, Safety and Welfare Approved Code of Practice
and Guidance published by TSO.
The Workplace Regulations apply to the common parts of flats and similar
buildings if people such as cleaners, wardens and caretakers are employed
to work in these common parts. Where the requirements of the Building
Regulations that are covered by Part E do not apply to dwellings, the
provisions may still be required in the situations described above in order to
satisfy the Workplace Regulations.
The Construction (Design and Management) Regulations (Northern
Ireland) 2007
The Construction (Design and Management) Regulations (Northern Ireland)
2007 impose requirements which affect building design. These include,
amongst other things, the need for co-ordination, co-operation and
communication between all parties in the construction process.
The purpose of this Technical Booklet is to provide guidance on the fire
safety requirements for the completed building. It does not address the risk
of fire during the construction work which is covered by the Construction
(Design and Management) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2007. HSE has
issued the following guidance on fire safety in construction – Construction
information sheet No 51 Construction fire safety; and HSG 168 Fire safety in
construction work.
When the construction work is being carried out on a building which, apart
from the construction site part of the building, is occupied, the Northern
Ireland Fire and Rescue Service Board is responsible for the enforcement of
the 2007 Regulations in respect of fire. Where the building is unoccupied,
the Health and Safety Executive is responsible for enforcement on the
construction site.
Commission guidance papers and decisions
The following guidance papers and Commission Decisions are directly
relevant to fire matters under the Construction Products Directive –
Guidance paper G – The European classification system for the reaction to
fire performance of construction products.
Guidance paper J – Transitional arrangements under the Construction
Products Directive.
Commission Decision of 8 February 2000 (2000/147/EC) implementing
Council Directive 89/106/EEC as regards the classification of the reaction to
fire performance of construction products.
6
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Commission Decision of 3 May 2000 (2000/367/EC) implementing Council
Directive 89/106/EEC as regards the classification of the resistance to fire
performance of construction products, construction works and parts thereof.
7
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Part E Regulations
Part E (comprising regulations 32 to 37) of the Building Regulations, which sets out the
requirements for Fire safety, has been replicated below for the convenience of the user
of this Technical Booklet and is taken directly from the Building Regulations (Northern
Ireland) 2012.
Any person who intends to demonstrate compliance with the Building Regulations by
following the guidance given in this Technical Booklet is advised to ensure that the
regulations below, are current on the date when plans are deposited or notices given to
the district council.
As Part A (comprising regulations 1 to 21) of the Building Regulations sets out the
Interpretation along with the procedural requirements relating to the application of the
regulations, the Department advises that all Parts of the Building Regulations are read
in conjunction with Part A of those regulations.
The Building Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2012 and any subsequent amendment/s
may be viewed by following the links from the Department’s website at
“www.buildingregulationsni.gov.uk”.
PART E
Fire safety
Application and interpretation
32.—(1) Regulations 33 and 35(3) shall not apply to a prison within the meaning of the
Prisons Act (Northern Ireland) 1953(a) or any other place of lawful detention.
(2) In this Part—
“Dwelling” means a self-contained unit of residential accommodation occupied (whether or
not as a sole or main residence)—
(a) by a single person or by people living together as a family; or
(b) by not more than 6 people living together as a single household, including a household
where care is provided for residents;
“Dwellinghouse” means a dwelling on one or more storeys which is detached or forms part
of a building from all other parts of which it is divided only vertically and does not include
a flat;
“Flat” has the meaning assigned to it by regulation 2 in Part A;
“Internal linings” means the materials lining any partition, wall, ceiling or other internal
structure;
“Means of escape” means structural means whereby, in the event of a fire, a safe route or
routes is or are provided for people to travel from any point in a building to a place of
safety; and
“Place of safety” means a place, outside the building, in which people are in no danger from
fire within the building.
(a) 1953 c. 18 (N.I.)
8
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Means of escape
33. A building shall be so designed and constructed that in the event of a fire there is—
(a) where appropriate, adequate means of automatic detection;
(b) adequate means of giving warning; and
(c) adequate means of escape, which can be safely and effectively used at all material
times.
Internal fire spread – Linings
34. To inhibit the spread of fire within a building the internal linings shall—
(a) offer adequate resistance to the spread of flame over their surfaces; and
(b) where they are located in a circulation space, have a low rate of heat release or a low
rate of fire growth when ignited.
Internal fire spread – Structure
35.—(1) A building shall be so designed and constructed that, in the event of a fire, its stability
will be retained for a reasonable period.
(2) A wall common to two or more buildings shall be so designed and constructed that it
provides adequate resistance to the spread of fire between those buildings and for the purposes
of this paragraph a dwellinghouse in a terrace and a semi-detached dwellinghouse shall be
considered as a separate building.
(3) To inhibit the spread of fire within it, a building shall be adequately sub-divided with fire-
resisting construction.
(4) A building shall be so designed and constructed that the spread of fire (and in particular
smoke) within concealed spaces in its structure and fabric is adequately inhibited.
External fire spread
36. The external walls and roof of a building shall be so designed and constructed that they
afford adequate resistance to the spread of fire over them, and from one building to another,
having regard to—
(a) in the case of an external wall - the use, position and height of the building; and
(b) in the case of a roof - the use and position of the building.
Facilities and access for the Fire and Rescue Service
37.—(1) A building shall be designed and constructed with such reasonable facilities as are
necessary to assist the Fire and Rescue Service in ensuring the safety of people in and about the
building in the event of a fire.
(2) Reasonable provisions shall be made within the boundary of the premises for access to the
building by fire and rescue appliances for the purpose of paragraph (1).
9
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Guidance – Performance and introduction to provisions
Means of escape
Performance
0.1
It is the view of the Department that the requirements of regulation 33 in
Part E will be met if there is sufficient means for giving early warning of fire
for persons in a building and –
(a) if there are routes of sufficient number and capacity, which are suitably
located to enable persons to escape to a place of safety in the event of
fire;
(b) if the routes are sufficiently protected from the effects of fire by
enclosure where necessary;
(c) if the routes are adequately lit;
(d) if the exits are suitably signed; and
(e) if there are appropriate facilities to either limit the ingress of smoke to
the escape route(s) or to restrict the fire and remove smoke.
The extent to which the measures in respect of escape routes are
necessary is dependent on the use of the building, its size and height.
Introduction to provisions in Section 2
0.2
The guidance in Section 2 is concerned with ensuring that occupants are
given warning of, and have a means of escape from, a fire. It only refers to
structural fire precautions where these are necessary to safeguard an
escape route. The provisions have been prepared on the basis that the
occupants of any part of a building should be able to escape from the
building, in the event of a fire, without external assistance.
In dwellings and certain other buildings an automatic fire detection and
alarm system can significantly increase the level of safety by automatically
giving an early warning of fire. In other buildings an appropriate fire alarm
system should provide adequate warning to occupants.
The design of the means of escape is based on the assumption that a fire
will start in only one location and initially be a hazard in that area only.
Subsequently it may spread to other parts, usually through circulation
routes. Furnishings and equipment are not covered by the Building
Regulations but are usually the items first ignited in a fire. A fire is less likely
to start within the structure of the building or in a circulation area.
The primary danger in the early stages of a fire is not flame but smoke and
other products of combustion which can directly affect the occupants of the
building and obscure the escape routes. Measures designed to provide safe
means of escape must therefore include provisions to limit the spread of
smoke and other products of combustion.
10
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

The basic principles for the design of means of escape are –
(a) there should be alternative means of escape from most locations so
that people can turn their back on a fire and travel away from it to a
place of safety; and
(b) where direct escape to a place of safety is not possible, the aim is to
reach a place of relative safety, such as a protected stairway, within a
reasonable travel distance. In such cases the escape route should
consist of two parts – the first part in unprotected rooms and
circulation areas, and the second part in protected stairways and in
some circumstances protected corridors.
A protected stairway is considered to be a place of relative safety
within which people can proceed at their own pace to a place of safety.
Smoke and flames must be excluded from protected stairways by fire
and smoke-resisting construction or by an appropriate smoke control
system or both.
The ultimate place of safety is the open air clear of the effects of the
fire.
The following are not acceptable for means of escape –
(i)
a lift (except a suitably designed and installed evacuation lift);
(ii) a passenger conveyor or escalator;
(iii) a portable or throw-out ladder; and
(iv) manipulative apparatus and appliances.
Specific approaches for the design of means of escape
Shopping complexes
0.3
Although the guidance in Section 2 may be readily applied to individual
shops, shopping complexes present a different set of escape problems. The
design of shop units within a shopping complex should be compatible with
the fire strategy for the complex as a whole. A suitable approach is given in
the relevant recommendations of BS 5588-10.
Note – BS 5588-10 applies more restrictive provisions to shop units with
only one exit in covered shopping complexes.
Health care premises
0.4
Health care premises including hospitals and residential health care
buildings are quite diverse and can be used by a variety of patients, often
requiring different types of care to suit their specific needs. The choice of fire
safety strategy is dependent upon the way a building is designed, furnished,
staffed and managed and the level of dependency of the patients.
In parts of health care premises designed to be used by patients, where
there are people who are bedridden or who have very restricted mobility, the
principle of total evacuation in the event of a fire may be inappropriate. It is
also unrealistic to suppose that all patients will leave without assistance. In
this and other ways the specialised nature of some health care premises
demands a different approach to the provision of means of escape, from
much of that embodied in the guidance given in Section 2.
11
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

The Department of Health, Social Services and Public Safety has produced
a set of guidance documents on fire precautions in health care buildings
under the general title of the Northern Ireland Firecode.
A suitable approach for the design of means of escape in health care
premises is given in the relevant publications contained in the Northern
Ireland Firecode. (These documents may also be used for non-NHS health
care premises.)
Assembly buildings
0.5
There are particular problems that arise when fixed seating impinges on
people’s ability to escape in the event of a fire. This may occur at sports
grounds, theatres, lecture halls and conference centres etc. Guidance on
this and other aspects of means of escape in an Assembly building is given
in Sections 3 and 5 of BS 5588-6 and the relevant recommendations of that
code should be followed in appropriate cases. In the case of buildings to
which The Safety of Sports Grounds (Northern Ireland) Order 2006 applies
the relevant guidance in the Northern Ireland guide to safety at sports
grounds should be followed.
Houses in multiple occupation (HMO)
0.6
A suitable approach for the design of means of escape in a house in multiple
occupation is given in the relevant provisions of Section 5 of
DOE Circular 12/92: Houses in multiple occupation.
The licensing of HMOs in Northern Ireland is overseen by the Housing
Executive which may require additional measures. The Housing Executive
has published the following guidance: Houses in multiple occupation, Fire
safety guide.
Hotels and boarding houses
0.7
A suitable approach for the design of means of escape in a Hotel or
Boarding House is given in the relevant provisions of Chapters 13 and 14 of
the Guide to fire precautions in premises used as hotels or boarding houses
which require a fire certificate published by the Home Office: 1991.
Schools
0.8
Although the guidance in this Technical Booklet applies to schools,
additional life safety guidance in respect of means of escape may be found
in BB 100: Design for fire safety in schools.
12
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Internal fire spread – Linings
Performance
0.9
It is the view of the Department that the requirements of regulation 34 in
Part E will be met if the spread of flame over the internal linings of a building
is restricted by making provision for them to have low rates of surface
spread of flame, and in some cases to have a low rate of heat release, so as
to limit the contribution that the fabric of the building makes to fire growth. In
relation to the European fire tests and classification system, the
requirements of regulation 34 in Part E will be met if the heat released from
the internal linings is restricted by making provision for them to have a
resistance to ignition and a rate of fire growth which are reasonable in the
circumstances.
The extent to which this is necessary is dependent on the location of the
linings.
Introduction to provisions in Section 3
0.10
The materials used for the linings of walls and ceilings in a building can
significantly affect the spread of fire and its rate of growth. The guidance in
Section 3 restricts the spread of fire over internal linings by ensuring they
have low rates of surface spread of flame. In some locations the internal
linings must also have a low rate of heat production so as to limit the
contribution that the fabric of the building makes to fire growth.
There are no provisions in relation to the upper surfaces of floors and stairs
because such surfaces are not involved significantly in a fire until it is well
developed. They do not therefore play an important part in fire spread during
the early stages of a fire, which are the most relevant to the life safety of
occupants.
Although furniture and fittings can have a major effect on fire spread it is not
possible to control them through Building Regulations, and no provisions
relating to them are included in this Technical Booklet. The fire
characteristics of furniture and fittings may be controlled in some buildings
under other legislation which applies to those buildings when in use.
Internal fire spread – Structure
Performance
0.11
It is the view of the Department that the requirements of regulation 35 in
Part E will be met –
(a) if the loadbearing elements of structure of a building are capable of
withstanding the effects of fire for an appropriate period without loss of
stability;
(b) if a building is sub-divided by elements of fire-resisting construction
into compartments;
(c) if any openings in fire-separating elements are suitably protected in
order to maintain the integrity of the element (i.e. the continuity of the
fire separation); and
13
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

(d) if any hidden voids in the construction are sealed and subdivided to
inhibit the unseen spread of fire and products of combustion, in order
to reduce the risk of structural failure, and the spread of fire, in so far
as they pose a threat to the safety of people in and around the
building.
The extent to which any of these measures are necessary is dependent on
the use of the building, in some cases its size, and on the location of the
element of construction.
Introduction to provisions in Section 4
0.12
The guidance in Section 4 is concerned with the spread of fire within a
building. This can be restricted by the provision of structural measures such
as fire-resisting elements of construction, compartmentation, cavity barriers
and fire-stopping.
Fire-resisting elements of construction – the objective of providing the
elements of structure and certain other components of the building with a
minimum standard of fire resistance is to minimise the risk to the occupants
whilst evacuating, to the firefighting personnel whilst engaged in search and
rescue operations and to people in the vicinity of the building who may be
hurt by falling debris or as a result of the impact of the collapsing building on
another building.
Compartmentation – the spread of fire within a building can be restricted by
subdividing it into compartments separated from one another by walls
and/or floors of fire-resisting construction. The objectives are to prevent
rapid fire spread, which could trap occupants of the building, and to reduce
the chance of a fire becoming large, on the basis that a large fire is more
dangerous, not only to occupants and firefighting personnel, but to people in
the vicinity of the building.
Cavity barriers – concealed and extensive spaces within construction
provide a ready route for the hidden spread of smoke and flame. The
objectives of cavity barriers are to limit the extent of such spaces and to
subdivide them where they would otherwise form a pathway around fire-
resisting construction.
Protection of penetrations – in order that the fire integrity of elements of
structure intended to provide fire separation is maintained, penetrations of
such construction, by pipes, ducts, cables, etc. must be suitably protected.
Fire-stopping – the objective of fire-stopping is to adequately seal or protect
every joint, imperfection of fit, opening and penetration in an element of
structure intended to provide fire separation, so that its effectiveness is not
impaired.
This Section also contains guidance relating to car parks for light vehicles.
In buildings or separated parts of buildings used as parking for cars and
other light vehicles the fire load is well defined and not particularly high. Fire
spread is not likely to occur between one vehicle and another. Where the
car park is well ventilated (so that heat and smoke can dissipate readily)
there is a low probability of fire spread from one storey to another.
14
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

External fire spread
Performance
0.13
It is the view of the Department that the requirements of regulation 36 in
Part E will be met –
(a) if the external walls are constructed so that the risk of ignition from an
external source, and the spread of fire over their surfaces, is restricted
by making provision for them to have low rates of heat release;
(b) if the amount of unprotected area in the side of a building is restricted
so as to limit the amount of thermal radiation that can pass through
the wall, taking the distance between the wall and the boundary into
account; and
(c) if the roof is constructed so that the risk of spread of flame and/or fire
penetration from an external fire source is restricted,
in each case so as to limit the risk of a fire spreading from the building to
another building beyond the boundary, or vice versa.
The extent to which this is necessary is dependent on the use of the
building, its distance from the boundary and, in some cases, its height.
Introduction to provisions in Section 5
0.14
The guidance in Section 5 which relates to the extent to which fire may
spread over and between buildings depends on the size and intensity of the
fire, the construction of the external walls and roof, and the distance
between the buildings.
Construction of walls – the fire resistance of an external wall and the
combustibility of its external face are controlled to reduce its susceptibility to
ignition from an external source and the danger from fire spreading up the
external face of the building.
Construction of roofs – the combustibility of the external surface of a roof is
controlled to reduce its susceptibility to ignition from an external source.
Distance between buildings – adequate separation between buildings is
achieved by relating the amount of unprotected area (e.g. windows, areas of
combustible wall, etc.) in the wall of a building or compartment to the
distance that wall is from its relevant boundary. It may be advantageous to
reduce compartment sizes or to provide compartmentation where none
would otherwise be necessary, as this will reduce the size of the fire and
may permit a reduced boundary distance or alternatively, an increase in
unprotected area.
15
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Facilities and access for the Fire and Rescue Service
Performance
0.15
It is the view of the Department that the requirements of regulation 37 in
Part E will be met –
(a) if there is sufficient means of external access to enable fire appliances
to be brought near to a building for effective use;
(b) if there is sufficient means of access into, and within, a building for
firefighting personnel to effect search and rescue and fight fire;
(c) if a building is provided with sufficient internal fire mains and other
facilities to assist firefighters in their tasks; and
(d) if a building is provided with adequate means for venting heat and
smoke from a fire in a basement.
These access arrangements and facilities are only required in the interests
of the health and safety of people in and around the building. The extent to
which they are required will depend on the use and size of the building in so
far as it affects the health and safety of those people.
Introduction to provisions in Section 6
0.16
The guidance in Section 6 relating to facilities and access is for the
purposes of assisting the Fire and Rescue Service to ensure the safety of
people in and around a building.
Generally in small buildings the combination of the access offered by the
normal means of access and egress, and the ability of the Fire and Rescue
Service to work from ladders and appliances are sufficient without special
access or internal facilities. However, in large buildings and buildings with
basements the Fire and Rescue Service will invariably work inside the
building and firefighting shafts, fire mains, venting of basements and access
will be necessary.
Firefighting shafts – the provisions are to ensure that the Fire and Rescue
Service will have a secure operating base on every storey of large buildings.
Fire mains – the purpose of a fire main within a firefighting shaft is to enable
firefighters to connect hoses and receive a supply of water for firefighting
and rescue activities.
Access – the provisions relating to vehicle access are to enable the Fire and
Rescue Service’s pumping appliances to supply water to the fire mains and
for high reach appliances to be deployed.
Venting of basements – the enclosed nature of a basement prevents the
dispersal of heat and smoke, which tend to rise up the access that the Fire
and Rescue Service may be using to approach the fire. The provisions for
smoke removal facilities are to enable firefighters to more effectively search
for and rescue any people who may be trapped, and to locate and attack the
fire.
16
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Use of this Technical Booklet
Relationship between Sections
0.17
The guidance set out in this Technical Booklet under Sections 2 to 6 deals
with different aspects of fire safety. Whilst the guidance appropriate to each
of these aspects is set out separately, many of the provisions are closely
interlinked. For example, there is a close link between the provisions for
means of escape (Section 2) and those for the control of fire growth
(Section 3), fire containment (Section 4) and facilities for the Fire and
Rescue Service (Section 6). Similarly, there are links between Section 4 and
the provisions for controlling external fire spread (Section 5), and between
Section 4 and Section 6. Interaction between these different provisions
should be recognised when considering alternative solutions, as the
adoption of a higher standard of provision in respect of one aspect may be
of benefit in respect to the provisions relating to one or more other aspects.
Thus the provisions in the Technical Booklet as a whole should be
considered as a package aimed at achieving an acceptable standard of fire
safety.
Provisions common to more than one Section
0.18
Within this Technical Booklet there are a number of matters which are
relevant to more than one Section. Generally these have been located in the
most appropriate Section and cross referenced where necessary. However,
definitions, the classification of purpose groups and the methods for
measurement are needed for all Sections. These have been drawn together
for common reference in Section 1, Appendix A and Appendix B
respectively.
17
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Section 1
General
Definitions
1.1
In this Technical Booklet the following definitions apply –
Access room – a room that forms the only escape route from an inner
room.
Accommodation stairway – a stairway, additional to that or those required
for escape purposes, provided for the convenience of occupants.
Alternative escape routes – escape routes sufficiently separated by either
direction and space, or by fire-resisting construction, to ensure that one is
still available should the other be affected by fire.
Alternative exit – one of two or more exits, each of which is separate from
the other.
Appliance ventilation duct – a duct provided to convey combustion air to a
gas appliance.
Atrium (plural atria) – a space within a building not necessarily vertically
aligned, passing through one or more structural floors. (The term does not
include enclosed lift wells, enclosed escalator wells, building services ducts
and stairways.)
Automatic fire detection and alarm system – a system incorporating
smoke detectors, sounders, control equipment, protected wiring and a
back-up power supply which is capable of automatically detecting smoke
and thereupon giving an audible alarm.
Automatic release mechanism – a device which will allow a door held
open by it to close automatically in the event of each or any one of the
following –
(a) detection of smoke by automatic apparatus suitable in nature, quality
and location;
(b) operation of a hand operated switch fitted in a suitable position;
(c) failure of electricity supply to the device, apparatus or switch; and
(d) operation of the fire alarm system where fitted.
Automatic self-closing device – a device which is capable of closing a
door from any angle and against any latch fitted to the door.
[The term does not include rising butt hinges unless the door is –
(a) to (or within) a dwelling;
(b) between a dwellinghouse and its garage; or
(c) in a cavity barrier.]
Basement storey – a storey with a floor which at some point is more than
1.2 m below the highest level of ground adjacent to the outside walls.
18
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Cavity barrier – a construction provided to close a concealed space against
penetration of smoke or flame, or provided to restrict the movement of
smoke or flame within such a space.
Ceiling – a part of a building which encloses and is exposed overhead in a
room, protected shaft or circulation space. (The soffit of a rooflight, but not
the frame is included as part of the ceiling surface. An upstand below a
rooflight should be considered as wall.)
Circulation space – a space (including a protected stairway) mainly used
as a means of access between a room and an exit from the building or
compartment.
Class 0 – a product performance classification for wall and ceiling linings.
The relevant test criteria are set out in paragraph 3.4.
Compartment – a building or part of a building, comprising one or more
rooms, spaces or storeys, constructed to prevent the spread of fire to or
from another part of the same building, or an adjoining building. A roof
space above the top storey of a compartment is included in that
compartment.
Compartment floor – a fire-resisting floor used in the separation of one
compartment from another.
Compartment wall – a fire-resisting wall used in the separation of one
compartment from another.
Concealed space or cavity – a space enclosed by elements of a building
(including a suspended ceiling) or contained within an element, but not a
room, cupboard, circulation space, protected shaft or space within a flue,
chute, duct, pipe or conduit.
Dead end – area from which escape is possible in one direction only.
Direct distance – the shortest distance from any point within the floor area
to the nearest storey exit, measured within the external enclosures of the
building, ignoring walls, partitions and fittings, other than the enclosing
walls/partitions to protected stairways.
Dwelling – has the meaning assigned to it by regulation 32 in Part E of the
Building Regulations.
Dwellinghouse – has the meaning assigned to it by regulation 32 in Part E
of the Building Regulations.
Element of structure –
(a) a member forming part of the structural frame of a building or any
other beam or column;
(b) a loadbearing wall or loadbearing part of a wall;
(c) a floor;
(d) a gallery (but not a loading gallery, fly gallery, stage grid, lighting
bridge, or any gallery provided for similar purposes or for maintenance
and repair);
(e) an external wall; and
19
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

(f)
a compartment wall (including a wall common to two or more
buildings).
(However, see paragraph 4.11 for exclusions from the provisions for
elements of structure.)
Emergency egress window – an openable window in a dwelling that may
be used for emergency egress in order to avoid entrapment should the
escape route or routes be blocked by fire or smoke.
Emergency lighting – lighting provided for use when the electricity supply
to the normal lighting fails.
Escape lighting – that part of the emergency lighting which is provided to
ensure that the escape route is illuminated at all material times.
Escape route – route forming that part of the means of escape from any
point in a building to a final exit.
Evacuation lift – a lift that may be used for the evacuation of people in the
event of a fire.
External wall (or side of a building) – includes a part of a roof pitched at an
angle of more than 70° to the horizontal, if that part of the roof adjoins a
space within the building to which persons have access (but not access only
for repair or maintenance).
Final exit – the termination of an escape route from a building giving direct
access to a street, passageway, walkway or open space, and sited to ensure
the rapid dispersal of people from the vicinity of a building so that they are
no longer in danger from fire or smoke or both. (A window is not acceptable
as a final exit.)
Fire door – a door or shutter, provided for the passage of people, air or
objects, which together with its frame and furniture as installed in a building,
is intended (when closed) to resist the passage of fire or gaseous products
of combustion or both, and is capable of meeting specified performance
criteria to those ends. (It may have one or more leaves, and the term
includes a cover or other form of protection to an opening in a fire-resisting
wall or floor, or in a structure surrounding a protected shaft.)
Fire-resisting (fire resistance) – the ability of a component or construction
of a building to satisfy for a stated period of time, some or all of the
appropriate criteria specified in the relevant Part of BS 476.
Fire separating element – a compartment wall, compartment floor, cavity
barrier and construction enclosing a protected shaft, protected escape route
and a place of special fire hazard.
Fire stop – a seal provided to close an imperfection of fit or design
tolerance between elements or components, to restrict or prevent the
passage of fire and smoke.
Firefighting lift – a lift designed to have additional protection, with controls
that enable it to be used under the direct control of the Fire and Rescue
Service when fighting a fire.
Technical Booklet E: 2012
20
Fire safety

Firefighting lobby – a protected lobby for providing access from a
firefighting stairway to the accommodation area and to any associated
firefighting lift.
Firefighting shaft – a protected enclosure containing a firefighting stairway,
firefighting lobbies and, if provided, a firefighting lift together with its
machinery.
Firefighting stairway – a protected stairway communicating with the
accommodation area only through a firefighting lobby.
Flat – has the meaning assigned to it by regulation 32 in Part E of the
Building Regulations.
Gallery – a floor, including a raised storage area, which is less than
one-half of the floor area of the space into which it projects and is open both
above and below to that space.
Hallway (Hall) – a circulation space inside the entrance to a dwelling used
solely to give access to rooms and, where provided, a stairway.
Heat alarm – a device containing within one housing all the components,
except possibly the energy source, necessary for detecting heat and giving
an audible alarm.
Inner room – a room from which escape is possible only by passing through
another room (access room).
Internal linings – has the meaning assigned to it by regulation 32 in Part E
of the Building Regulations.
Materials of limited combustibility – materials which comply with
paragraph 1.9 or 1.10.
Means of escape – has the meaning assigned to it by regulation 32 in
Part E of the Building Regulations.
Measurement –
(a) the rules for measuring area, cubic capacity, number of storeys, height
of a building and height to a storey are given in paragraph B.1; and
(b) the methods for measuring occupant capacity, travel distance, and the
width of a doorway, escape route and stairway are given in Section 2.
Non-combustible material – a material which complies with paragraph 1.7
or 1.8.
Notional boundary – a boundary presumed to exist between buildings on
the same site (see paragraph 5.9).
Open spatial planning – the internal arrangement of a building in which
more than one storey or level is contained in one undivided volume, e.g.
split-level floors and galleries. For the purposes of this Technical Booklet
there is a distinction between open spatial planning and an atrium space.
Perimeter (of building) – the maximum aggregate plan perimeter excluding
any wall separating buildings, found by vertical projection onto a horizontal
plane.
21
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Pipe – (for the purposes of Section 4) includes pipe fittings and accessories;
and excludes a flue pipe and a pipe used for ventilating purposes (other
than a ventilating pipe for an above ground drainage system).
Place of safety – has the meaning assigned to it by regulation 32 in Part E
of the Building Regulations.
Places of special fire hazard – oil-filled transformer and switchgear rooms,
boiler rooms, storage space for fuel or other highly flammable substances
and rooms housing a fixed internal combustion engine. Additionally in
schools – laboratories, technology rooms with open heat sources, kitchens
and stores for PE mats (including landing mats and crash mats) or
chemicals.
Platform floor (access or raised floor) – a floor supported by a structural
floor, but with an intervening concealed space which is intended to house
services.
Pressurization – a method of protecting escape routes against the ingress
of smoke by maintaining the air within them at pressures higher than those
in adjacent parts of the building.
Principal habitable room – the habitable room in a dwelling that is normally
the most frequently used room for general daytime living purposes.
Protected circuit – an electrical circuit protected against fire.
Protected corridor or lobby – a corridor or lobby which is adequately
protected from fire in adjoining accommodation by fire-resisting construction.
Protected entrance hall or landing – a circulation area consisting of a hall
or space within a dwelling, enclosed with fire-resisting construction (other
than any part which is an external wall or building).
Protected shaft – a shaft which enables people, air or objects to pass from
one compartment to another, and which is enclosed with fire-resisting
construction.
Protected stairway – a stairway discharging through a final exit to a place
of safety (including any exit passageway between the foot of the stair and
the final exit) that is adequately enclosed with fire-resisting construction.
Purpose group – a classification of buildings or compartments according to
the purpose to which they are intended to be put (see paragraph A.2).
Refuge – an area that is adequately protected from fire in adjoining
accommodation by fire-resisting construction and which is served directly by
a safe route to a storey exit, thus constituting a temporarily safe place for
people to use as part of their personal emergency evacuation plan.
Relevant boundary – the boundary which the side of the building faces,
(and/or coincides with) and which is parallel, or at an angle of not more than
80°, to the side of the building. A notional boundary can be a relevant
boundary.
Rooflight – a domelight, lantern light, skylight, ridge light, glazed barrel
vault or other element intended to admit daylight through a roof.
22
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Room – (for the purposes of Section 3) an enclosed space within a building
that is not used solely as a circulation space. (The term includes not only
conventional rooms, but also cupboards that are not fittings, and large
spaces such as warehouses, and auditoria. The term does not include voids
such as ducts, ceiling voids and roof spaces.)
Separated part (of a building) – a form of compartmentation in which a part
of a building is separated from another part of the same building by a
compartment wall. The wall runs the full height of the part, and is in one
vertical plane.
Single storey building – a building consisting only of a ground storey and
any basement storeys. (A separated part which consists of a ground storey
only, with a roof to which access is only provided for repair or maintenance,
may be treated as a single storey building.)
Smoke alarm – a device containing within one housing all the components,
except possibly the energy source, necessary for detecting smoke and
giving an audible alarm.
Storey exit – a final exit, or a doorway giving direct access into a protected
stairway, firefighting lobby, or external escape route. (In some circumstances
a door in a compartment wall may be considered as a storey exit, e.g. in a
building designed for progressive horizontal evacuation.)
Storey – includes –
(a) in a building of Purpose Group 5 – a gallery [other than the exceptions
given in paragraph B.1(c)]; and
(b) in a building of any purpose group – a roof which is accessible unless
it is accessible only for maintenance and repair.
Suspended ceiling (fire-protecting) – a ceiling suspended below a floor,
which contributes to the fire resistance of the floor.
Thermoplastic material – a synthetic polymeric material which can be
classified in accordance with paragraph 3.4 or 3.5.
Travel distance – the actual distance to be travelled by a person from any
point within the floor area to the nearest storey exit, having regard to the
layout of walls, partitions and fittings.
Unprotected area – in relation to a side or external wall of a building
means –
(a) a window, door or other opening;
(b) any part of the external wall which has less than the relevant fire
resistance set out in Table 4.1; and
(c) any part of the external wall which has combustible material more than
1 mm thick attached or applied to its external face, whether for
cladding or any other purpose.
Wall – for the purposes of Section 3 see paragraph 3.9.
23
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

General guidance
Buildings containing atria
1.2
For the purposes of this Technical Booklet the use of BS 5588-7 is relevant
only where the atrium breaches compartmentation.
Inclusive design
1.3
The fire safety aspects of the Building Regulations are made for securing
reasonable standards of health and safety of people in and about buildings.
This is intended to include all people, including people with disabilities.
People, regardless of disability or age should be able to gain access to
buildings and use their facilities, both as visitors and as people who live or
work in them. Part R of the Building Regulations requires reasonable
provision in this respect. As such the fire safety measures incorporated into
a building will need to take account of the needs of all those people who
may have access to the building. It is not appropriate, except in exceptional
circumstances, to presume that certain groups of people will be excluded
from a building because of its use.
The provisions set out in this Technical Booklet are considered to be a
reasonable standard for most buildings. However, there may be some
people whose specific needs are not addressed. In some situations
additional fire safety measures may be needed to accommodate these
needs. Such measures should be considered on a case by case basis.
Fire safety management
1.4
The provisions of this Technical Booklet have been written on the
assumption that fire safety in the building concerned will be adequately
managed.
Fire safety management is controlled by other legislation such as the Fire
and Rescue Services (Northern Ireland) Order 2006 and the associated
Fire Safety Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2010 for workplaces deemed to
be relevant premises.
Fire Safety in Protected buildings
1.5
Some variation of the provisions set out in this booklet may be appropriate
where Part E applies to protected buildings, where adherence to the
guidance in this booklet might prove to be unduly restrictive. In such cases it
would be appropriate to take into account a range of fire safety features,
some of which are contained in this booklet and some of which are not
addressed in any detail and to set these against an assessment of the
hazards and risks peculiar to the particular case.
24
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Property protection
1.6
Building Regulations are intended to ensure that an adequate standard of
life safety is provided in case of fire. The protection of property, including the
building itself, may require additional measures and insurers will in general
seek their own measures if they are to accept the insurance risk. Such
measures (e.g. locking doors on escape routes) must not negate or reduce
the level of protection or performance of any provision in this Technical
Booklet.
Non-combustible materials
1.7
A non-combustible material is under National classification –
(a) a material classified as non-combustible when tested in accordance
with BS 476: Part 4;
(b) a material which when tested in accordance with BS 476: Part 11 does
not flame and does not cause a rise in temperature on either the
centre (specimen) thermocouple or the furnace thermocouple;
(c) a material which is either totally inorganic or does not contain more
than 1% by weight or volume, of organic material; or
(d) concrete bricks or blocks meeting BS EN 771-3.
1.8
A non-combustible material is under European classification –
(a) a material classified as Class A1 in accordance with BS EN 13501-1
Fire classification of construction products and building
elements – Part 1: Classification using test data from reaction to fire
tests, when tested to –
(i)
BS EN ISO 1182 Reaction to fire tests for building
products – Non-combustibility test; and
(ii) BS EN ISO 1716 Reaction to fire tests for building
products – Determination of the heat of combustion; or
(b) a product made from one or more of the materials considered as
Class A1 without the need for testing, as defined in Commission
Decision 96/603/EC of 4th October 1996 establishing the list of
products belonging to class A1 ‘No contribution to fire’ provided for in
the Decision 94/611/EC implementing Article 20 of the Council
Directive 89/106/EEC on construction products. None of the materials
should contain more than 1.0% by weight or volume (whichever is
lower) of homogeneously distributed organic material.
25
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Materials of limited combustibility
1.9
A material of limited combustibility is under National classification –
(a) a material which can be classified as non-combustible under
paragraphs 1.7(a) to (d);
(b) a material with a non-combustible core not less than 8 mm thick
having combustible facings (on one or both sides) not more than
0.5 mm thick;
(c) a material of density not less than 300 kg/m3 which, when tested in
accordance with BS 476: Part 11, does not flame or increase the
temperature on the furnace thermocouple by more than 20°C; or
(d) in the case of insulation referred to in Table 4.3 and paragraph 5.4 - a
material of density less than 300 kg/m3 which, when tested in
accordance with BS 476: Part 11 does not flame for more than 10
seconds and the rise in temperature is not more than 35°C on the
centre (specimen) thermocouple and not more than 25°C on the
furnace thermocouple.
1.10
A material of limited combustibility is under European classification –
(a) any material or product classified as non-combustible under paragraph
1.8(a) or (b); or
(b) a material or product classified as Class A2-s3,d2 or higher in
accordance with BS EN 13501-1 Fire classification of construction
products and building elements – Part 1: Classification using test data
from reaction to fire tests when tested to –
(i)
BS EN ISO 1182 Reaction to fire tests for building products –
Non-combustibility test; or
(ii) BS EN ISO 1716 Reaction to fire tests for building products –
Determination of the heat of combustion, and BS EN 13823
Reaction to fire tests for building products – Building products
excluding floorings exposed to the thermal attack by a single
burning item,
where a classification includes ‘s3,d2’ this means that there is no limit
set for smoke production and/or flaming droplets/particles.
Classification
1.11
National classifications do not automatically equate with the equivalent
European classifications therefore products cannot typically assume a
European class unless they have been tested accordingly.
26
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Alternative approaches
Risk-based design using BS 9999
1.12
BS 9999 Code of practice for fire safety in the design, management and use
of buildings gives flexibility to fire safety design through the use of a
structured approach to risk-based design, where designers can take
account of varing physical and human factors. Within its scope, this
document may be used as an alternative approach to following the relevant
methods and standards set out in this booklet.
Where designers elect to use BS 9999 in this manner they will need to
demonstrate that the relevant requirements of Part E have been met.
Fire safety engineering
1.13
A fire safety engineering approach which takes into account the total fire
safety package within a building may provide an adequate level of fire
safety. Indeed, it may be the only viable approach to the achievement of a
satisfactory standard in some large and complex buildings but it is beyond
the scope of this Technical Booklet. Fire safety engineering may also be
suitable for solving a problem with an aspect of the building design which
otherwise follows the provisions in this booklet.
BS 7974 Fire safety engineering in buildings and supporting published
documents provide a framework and guidance on the design and
assessment of fire safety measures in buildings. Following the discipline of
BS 7974 should enable designers and building control officers to be aware
of the relevant issues, the need to consider the complete fire safety system
and to follow a disciplined analytical framework.
Where designers elect to use a fire engineered approach they will need to
demonstrate that the relevant requirements of Part E have been met.
27
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Section 2
Means of escape
2.1
The provisions in this Section have been formulated using assumptions
regarding the likely source and growth of a fire and are based on recognised
criteria for means of escape. These assumptions and criteria are outlined in
paragraph 0.18.
The provisions are divided into –
(a) those applying to dwellinghouses – paragraphs 2.2 to 2.33;
(b) those applying to flats – paragraphs 2.34 to 2.36;
(c) those applying to all types of buildings other than dwellings –
(i)
the horizontal part of the escape route – paragraphs 2.40 to
2.59; and
(ii) the vertical part of the escape route – paragraphs 2.60 to 2.83;
and
(d) general provisions applying to dwellinghouses and all other types of
buildings except flats – paragraphs 2.84 to 2.103.
Dwellinghouses
Introduction
2.2
The provisions for means of escape in typical one and two storey
dwellinghouses (i.e. those with no storey more than 4.5 m above ground
level) are limited to the common provisions given in paragraphs 2.4 to 2.11.
With increasing height, provisions additional to the common provisions are
necessary, as stairs may become impassable before evacuation is complete
and the use of emergency egress windows becomes increasingly
hazardous. The additional provisions are given in paragraphs 2.12 to 2.16.
Where an external escape route is provided the provisions contained in
paragraphs 2.58, 2.59 and 2.76 should also apply.
2.3
The provisions for automatic fire detection and warning are given in
paragraphs 2.23 to 2.33. The installation of smoke and heat alarms or
automatic fire detection and alarm systems can significantly increase the
level of safety by automatically giving early warning of fire.
Common provisions
2.4
Every storey (including a basement storey) in a dwellinghouse which does
not have alternative escape routes leading to their own exits should have an
emergency egress window for escape or rescue purposes.
An emergency egress window that serves a storey should –
(a) where the storey is an upper storey – be located to facilitate rescue by
ladder from the ground;
28
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

(b) where it is a dormer or roof window – be positioned as shown on
Diagram 2.1;
(c) be located remote from the escape route; and
(d) comply with paragraph 2.9.
Where a basement storey contains a habitable room and does not have
alternative escape routes it should be served by a protected stairway that
extends to a final exit.
2.5
Every habitable room, on an upper storey not more than 4.5 m above
ground level that does not have alternative escape routes, should have an
emergency egress window complying with paragraph 2.9 for escape
purposes.
However, an emergency egress window may serve two such habitable
rooms provided that –
(a) both rooms have their own access to the stairway enclosure; and
(b) it is possible to gain access, via a communicating door between the
rooms, to the window without passing through the stairway enclosure.
2.6
A habitable room should open directly onto a hallway (including a corridor or
landing leading to the hallway) which leads to the entrance without passing
through any room (except a porch), other than where the habitable room –
(a) has an alternative escape route;
(b) is on a storey not more than 4.5 m above ground level and the
habitable room has an emergency egress window complying with
paragraph 2.9; or
(c) is part of a roof space conversion which complies with paragraphs
2.17 to 2.22.
Diagram 2.1
Emergency egress windows from roof space conversions of 2 storey
dwellinghouses
see para 2.4 and 2.22(b)
1.7 m max.
1.7 m max.
bottom of opening
bottom of opening
600 – 1100 mm
800 – 1100 mm
floor level
eaves
floor level
eaves
(a) Dormer window
(b) Roof window (rooflight)
Notes :
(1) Clear window opening not less than 0.33 m2 in area and at           
 
least 450 mm high and at least 450 mm wide.
(2) Window located to facilitate rescue by ladder from the        
 
 
ground.
(3) The window may be in the end wall of the dwellinghouse   
    
 
instead of the roof as shown.
29
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Access rooms to inner rooms
2.7
A habitable room may be an access room to any inner room. A kitchen
should not be an access room to an inner room other than –
(a) to a utility room or conservatory which has an emergency egress
window complying with paragraph 2.9; or
(b) where the kitchen and the inner room are on the same storey and the
kitchen is part of an alternative escape route leading to its own final
exit. See Diagram 2.2.
2.8
Where a habitable room, by virtue of a stairway discharging into it, is an
access room to a habitable room on the storey above –
(a) the upper storey should be not more than 4.5 m above
ground level; and
(b) the foot of the stairway should be not more than 3 m from –
(i)
a final exit; or
(ii) a door opening directly into a hallway (including a corridor
leading to the hallway).
Emergency egress windows
2.9
An emergency egress window should –
(a) have a clear opening that is not less than 0.33 m2 in area; and
(b) have a clear opening that is at least 450 mm high and at least 450 mm
wide.
The lower edge of the window opening should be not less than 800 mm and
not more than 1100 mm above the floor except in the case of a roof window
where the lower edge of the window opening may be not less than 600 mm
above the floor. For the purposes of this paragraph an emergency egress
window should be taken to include a door which leads to an area (e.g. a
balcony) from which a person could escape or be rescued. The minimum
height to the lower edge of the opening should not apply to such a door.
2.10
An emergency egress window should lead to a place that is free from the
danger of fire and not lead to an enclosed yard or garden unless it has an
area of relative safety which is not less than the height of the dwellinghouse
from the dwellinghouse. An enclosed yard or garden is one from which there
is no exit under the control of the occupants of the dwellinghouse.
Sleeping galleries
2.11
Where a gallery for sleeping purposes is provided –
(a) the gallery should be not more than 4.5 m above ground level;
(b) the distance between the foot of the access stair to the gallery and the
door to the room containing the gallery should be not more than 3 m;
(c) the floor area of the gallery should be not more than 30 m2;
(d) an alternative escape route, or an emergency egress window which
complies with paragraph 2.9 located remote from the access stair,
should be provided where the distance from the head of the access
stair to any point on the gallery is more than 7.5 m; and
30
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 2.2
Kitchen as access room
see para 2.7(b)
emergency egress 
window
final exit
habitable room 
(inner room)
kitchen
(access room)
part of 
alternative 
escape route
final exit
Note: 
storey not more than 4.5 m above ground level
(e) any cooking facilities within the room containing the gallery should
either –
(i)
be enclosed with fire-resisting construction; or
(ii) be remote from the stair to the gallery and be positioned so that
they do not prejudice the means of escape from the gallery.
Provisions additional to the common provisions for a
dwellinghouse with one storey more than 4.5 m above ground level
2.12
In a dwellinghouse with only one storey more than 4.5 m above
ground level –
(a) the top storey should –
(i)
be separated from the lower storeys by fire-resisting
construction; and
(ii) have an alternative escape route leading to its own final exit; or
(b) all storeys above the storey containing the final exit should be served
by a protected stairway which either –
(i)
extends to a final exit as shown in Diagram 2.3(a); or
(ii) leads to at least two escape routes at ground level, each
leading to a final exit and separated from each other by
fire-resisting construction and self-closing fire doors as shown in
Diagram 2.3(b).
31
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

2.13
Where the storey which is more than 4.5 m above ground level is created by
the conversion of the roof space of a two storey dwellinghouse the
provisions of paragraphs 2.17 to 2.22 may be applied as an alternative to
the provisions of paragraph 2.12.
Provisions additional to the common provisions for a
dwellinghouse with two or more storeys more than 4.5 m above
ground level
2.14
In a dwellinghouse with two or more storeys more than 4.5 m above ground
level –
(a) all storeys above the storey containing the final exit should be served
by a protected stairway which complies with paragraph 2.12(b); and
(b) each storey that is over 7.5 m above ground level should have an
alternative escape route leading to its own final exit. Where access to
an alternative escape route is through the protected stairway, the
protected stairway should be subdivided by fire-resisting construction
at or about 7.5 m above ground level.
Diagram 2.3
Alternative arrangements for final exits
see para 2.12(b) and 2.18(a) & (b)
final exit
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
protected
stairway
F.D.
protected
stairway
F.D.
final exit
final exit
(a) Protected stairway delivering 
 
directly to the final exit
(b) Protected stairway affording access
 
to two independent escape routes
Key
F.D.
fire-resisting door
fire-resisting construction
32
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Ducted air circulation systems
2.15
In a dwellinghouse with a storey more than 4.5 m above ground level, any
system of ducted air circulation should –
(a) not be fitted with transfer grilles between any room and a protected
stairway;
(b) not have supply and return grilles more than 450 mm above floor level;
(c) where air is ducted to a protected stairway – have the return air ducted
back to the heater;
(d) where a duct passes through the enclosure to a protected stairway –
have the joints between the duct and the enclosure fire-stopped; and
(e) where warm air heating is ducted – have a thermal cut out with
maximum setting of 27ºC, which turns off the heater and any
circulation fan if the ambient temperature exceeds that setting.
Passenger lifts
2.16
Where a passenger lift is provided and serves a storey more than 4.5 m
above ground level it should either –
(a) be located in the enclosure of a protected stairway; or
(b) be contained in a fire-resisting lift shaft.
Roof space conversions
2.17
Where a roof space is to be converted to habitable accommodation,
automatic fire detection and fire alarm in accordance with paragraph 2.23
and 2.24 should be provided and either –
(a) the relevant provisions of paragraphs 2.4 to 2.15 should apply; or
(b) where the existing dwellinghouse has two storeys the provisions in
paragraphs 2.18 to 2.22 may be followed provided that the new storey
does not –
(i)
exceed 50 m2 in floor area; or
(ii) contain more than two habitable rooms.
Note – The general provisions of this Section apply to any other roof space
conversion which adds a new storey to an existing dwellinghouse.
33
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Enclosure of existing stairway
2.18
The existing stairway should be enclosed by fire-resisting walls and either –
(a) extend to a final exit as shown in Diagram 2.3(a); or
(b) lead to at least two escape routes at ground level, each delivering to a
final exit and separated from each other by fire-resisting construction
and self-closing fire doors as shown in Diagram 2.3(b).
2.19
Any glazing (whether new or existing) in the enclosure of the existing
stairway, other than to a bathroom or sanitary accommodation, should be
fire-resisting. (See Tables 2.8, 4.1 and 4.2.)
2.20
Other than where paragraph 2.18 requires a fire door, every doorway in the
enclosure to the existing stairway should be fitted with an imperforate door.
A door to a habitable room or a kitchen should be fitted with a self-closing
device.
Where a new door is to be provided to an existing habitable room or kitchen
it should be a fire door.
Fire separation of new storey
2.21
The new storey should be separated from the rest of the dwellinghouse by
fire-resisting construction. The new stairway should either –
(a) rise as a continuation of the existing stairway and enclosure, in which
case the stairway should be separated from the new accommodation
by fire-resisting construction; or
(b) be separated from the existing stairway and the rest of the
dwellinghouse by fire-resisting construction.
Any door in new fire-resisting construction should be a self-closing fire door.
2.22
Each habitable room in the new storey should have –
(a) an emergency egress window which complies with paragraph 2.9; or
(b) an emergency egress dormer window or roof window, of the size given
in paragraph 2.9 positioned as shown in Diagram 2.1,
that is located to facilitate rescue from the ground by ladder.
However, an emergency egress window may serve both habitable rooms
provided that –
(i)
each room has its own access to the stairway enclosure; and
(ii) it is possible to gain access, via a communicating door between the
rooms, to the window without passing through the stairway enclosure.
34
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Automatic fire detection and fire alarm systems in dwellinghouses
2.23
A dwellinghouse should be provided with either –
(a) smoke alarms complying with BS 5446-1 and a heat alarm or alarms
complying with BS 5446-2 installed in accordance with paragraphs
2.25 to 2.33; or
(b) an automatic fire detection and fire alarm system complying with
BS 5839-6 of at least Grade D Category LD2 standard including a
smoke alarm or alarms in the principal habitable room and a heat
alarm or alarms in every kitchen.
Note – BS 5446-1 covers smoke alarms based on ionization chamber
smoke detectors and optical smoke detectors. These different types of
detector respond differently to smouldering and fast-flaming fires. Either type
of detector is generally suitable. However, the choice of detector type
should, if possible take into account the type of fire that might be expected
and the need to avoid false alarms. Optical detectors tend to be less
affected by low levels of ‘invisible’ particles, such as fumes from kitchens,
that often cause false alarms. Accordingly, they are generally more suitable
than ionization chamber detectors for installation in circulation spaces
adjacent to kitchens.
2.24
Where any storey in a dwellinghouse is more than 200 m2 in area the
dwellinghouse should be provided with –
(a) where the number of storeys is not more than 3 – an automatic fire
detection and fire alarm system complying with BS 5839-6 of at least
Grade B Category LD2 standard including a smoke detector or
detectors in the principal habitable room and a heat detector or
detectors in every kitchen; or
(b) where the number of storeys is more than 3 – an automatic fire
detection and fire alarm system complying with BS 5839-6 of at least
Grade A Category LD2 standard including a smoke detector or
detectors in the principal habitable room and a heat detector or
detectors in every kitchen.
Basement storeys should be counted in this provision.
Provision of smoke alarms and heat alarms
2.25
At least one smoke alarm should be provided –
(a) in the circulation route or routes on each storey; and
(b) in the principal habitable room,
and at least one heat alarm should be provided in every kitchen. The smoke
and heat alarms should be located to comply with the provisions of
paragraphs 2.27 to 2.32.
Smoke alarms and heat alarms should be interconnected so that they all
give an audible alarm when any one of them is activated.
35
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

The maximum number of smoke alarms and heat alarms which may be
interconnected should not exceed that given in the manufacturer’s
instructions.
A back-up power source to each smoke alarm and heat alarm should be
provided by either –
(i)
a primary or secondary battery; or
(ii) a capacitor.
Installation of smoke alarms and heat alarms
2.26
Smoke alarms and heat alarms should be permanently wired to either –
(a) a regularly used lighting circuit; or
(b) a circuit which –
(i)
is separately fused at the distribution board;
(ii) serves only smoke alarms and heat alarms; and
(iii) where a residual current device is used – is not connected to a
residual current device which is also used by any other circuit.
Smoke alarms and heat alarms may operate at a low voltage via a mains
transformer. The cable for the power supply to, and interconnection of, the
smoke alarms need not have special fire-survival properties.
2.27
Smoke alarms should be located in the circulation route or routes of a
dwellinghouse so that there is one –
(a) not more than 3 m from every bedroom door;
(b) not more than 7.5 m from every door to a living room or kitchen; and
(c) where a circulation route on a storey is more than 15 m long – not
more than 15 m from another smoke alarm on the same circulation
route and storey.
2.28
Smoke alarms should be located in a principal habitable room so that no
point in the room is more than 7.5 m from the nearest smoke alarm. Heat
alarms should be located in a kitchen so that no point in the kitchen is more
than 5.3 m from the nearest heat alarm.
2.29
A smoke alarm or heat alarm should be located so that it is –
(a) either on a ceiling and not less than 300 mm from a wall or light fitting,
or where designed for wall mounting on a wall and not less than
150 mm, or more than 300 mm from the ceiling and the sensitive
element should not be below the level of a door opening;
(b) not less than 300 mm from, and not directly above, a heater or an air
conditioning ventilator;
(c) on a surface which is normally at the ambient temperature for the
space it bounds; and
(d) easily and safely accessible.
36
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

2.30
Where a smoke alarm is mounted on a ceiling, it should be located so that
its sensitive element is not less than 25 mm or more than 600 mm below the
ceiling.
2.31
Where a heat alarm is mounted on a ceiling, it should be located so that its
sensitive element is not less than 25 mm or more than 150 mm below the
ceiling.
A heat alarm should not be located above a cooking appliance.
Note – The guidance given in this paragraph and paragraph 2.30 applies to
ceilings that are predominately flat and horizontal.
2.32
A smoke alarm should not be located in a kitchen, garage or other place
where steam, condensation or fumes could give false alarms.
2.33
Where dwellinghouses are part of a sheltered dwelling scheme with a
warden or supervisor, the fire detection and fire alarm system within each
dwellinghouse should be connected to the warden’s or supervisor’s central
monitoring point so as to –
(a) give an audible warning of the detection of smoke or heat in any
dwellinghouse; and
(b) enable the identification of the dwellinghouse involved.
Flats
Means of escape
2.34
The means of escape in a flat should be in accordance with the relevant
recommendations of BS 5588-1.
Automatic fire detection and fire alarm systems in flats
2.35
Each individual flat should be provided with either –
(a) smoke alarms complying with BS 5446-1 and a heat alarm or alarms
complying with BS 5446-2 installed in accordance with paragraphs
2.25 to 2.32; or
(b) an automatic fire detection and fire alarm system complying with
BS 5839-6 of at least Grade D Category LD2 standard including a
smoke alarm or alarms in the principal habitable room and a heat
alarm or alarms in every kitchen.
2.36
Where any storey in a flat is more than 200 m2 in area, the flat should be
provided with an automatic fire detection and fire alarm system complying
with BS 5839-6 of at least Grade B Category LD2 standard, including a
smoke detector or detectors in the principal habitable room and a heat
detector or detectors in every kitchen.
37
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Buildings other than dwellings
2.37
In buildings other than dwellings the number of escape routes needed
depends on the number of occupants (occupant capacity). In some cases a
room or a storey is designed to accommodate a known number of people; in
others the occupant capacity should be calculated by dividing the area of
the room or storey (excluding stairways, lifts and sanitary accommodation)
by the appropriate floor space factor given in Table 2.2. Where the occupant
capacity is calculated for rooms the occupant capacity of a storey is the sum
of the occupant capacities of the rooms on that storey. The occupant
capacity of a building or part of a building is the sum of the occupant
capacities of the storeys in that building or part.
2.38
In buildings other than dwellings a suitable fire detection and fire alarm
system to BS 5839-1 should be installed. The factors which have to be
considered when assessing what category of fire detection and fire alarm
system is to be provided will vary from one set of premises to another.
Therefore the appropriate category will need to be considered on a case by
case basis. Automatic detection should be provided where required by the
provisions in this Section and in Sections 4 and 6.
Note – General guidance on the category of automatic fire detection that
may need to be provided within a building can be found in
Table A.1 of BS 5839-1.
2.39
Where a building contains areas in different purpose groups the means of
escape from any area which is of Purpose Group 1(a), 2 or 5 should be
independent of the means of escape from other areas of the building.
Horizontal part of the escape route
2.40
The provisions in paragraphs 2.41 to 2.59 relate to horizontal escape routes
leading to storey exits. They are mainly concerned with providing more than
one escape route (except in the circumstances described in paragraph
2.41), limiting the distance to be travelled, and ensuring that the routes are
of adequate width.
Single escape routes
2.41
Alternative escape routes should be provided from all parts of the building
other than in the following circumstances where a single route is
permitted –
(a) areas from which a storey exit can be reached within the maximum
travel distance in one direction only given in Table 2.3, provided that
no room in this situation has an occupant capacity of more
than 60 people, or 30 people if the building is an
Institution [Purpose Group 2(a)]; and
(b) a storey with an occupant capacity of no more than 60 people
provided that a storey exit can be reached within the maximum travel
distance in one direction only given in Table 2.3.
38
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Travel distance
2.42
Whether there are alternative escape routes or only a single one, the travel
distance to the nearest storey exit should not exceed the maximum relevant
travel distance given in Table 2.3.
Note – It is only the distance to the nearest storey exit that should be so
limited. The distance from the same point in the storey to any other storey
exit may be longer.
Where the initial part of an escape route is in one direction only and leads to
a point from which escape is possible in two directions (e.g. as shown in
Diagram 2.4), the initial part should not exceed the maximum travel distance
in one direction only, and the overall travel distance should not exceed the
maximum travel distance in more than one direction.
Number of escape routes and exits
2.43
The number of escape routes and exits should be not less than the number
given in Table 2.1 for the relevant occupant capacity of the room or storey as
appropriate. The escape routes and exits should be arranged such that the
travel distances given in Table 2.3 are not exceeded.
Table 2.1
Minimum number of escape routes and exits from a
room or storey
Maximum occupant capacity
Minimum number of escape
routes/exits
60
1(1)
600
2
1000
3
2000
4
4000
5
7000
6
11000
7
16000
8
More than 16000
8(2)
Notes:
(1) See paragraph 2.41 for the circumstances in which single exits and escape routes are
acceptable.
(2) Plus 1 per 5000 people (or part thereof) over 16000.
39
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 2.2
Floor space factors
Floor space
factor
m2 per person
Item
Type of accommodation (1)(2)
1
Standing spectator areas
0.3
2
Amusement arcade, assembly hall (including a general purpose place of assembly),
bar (including a lounge bar), bingo hall, dance floor or hall, club, crush hall, venue for
pop concert and similar events, queuing area
0.5
3
Concourse (other than in a shopping complex)(3)
0.75
4
Committee room, common room, conference room, dining room, licensed betting office
(public area), lounge (other than a lounge bar), meeting room, reading room,
restaurant, staff room, waiting room
1.0(4)
5
Exhibition hall
1.5
6
Shop sales area(5), skating rink
2.0
7
Art gallery, dormitory, factory production area, office (open-plan exceeding 60 m2),
workshop
5.0
8
Kitchen, library, office (other than in item 7 above), shop sales area(6)
7.0
9
Bedroom or study-bedroom
8.0
10
Bed-sitting room, billiards room
10.0
11
Storage and warehouse accommodation
30.0
12
Car park
Two people
per parking
space
Notes:
(1) Where accommodation is not directly covered by the descriptions given, a reasonable value based on a similar use
may be selected.
(2) If there is to be mixed use, the most onerous factor should be applied.
(3) Refer to Section 4 of BS 5588-10 for detailed guidance on the calculation of occupancy and means of escape in
common areas in shopping complexes.
(4) Alternatively, the occupant capacity may be taken as the number of fixed seats provided, if the occupants will normally
be seated.
(5) Shops, other than those included under item 8, including – supermarkets and department stores (all sales areas),
shops for personal services such as hairdressing and shops for the delivery or collection of goods for cleaning, repair
or other treatment or for members of the public themselves carrying out such cleaning, repair or other treatment.
(6) Shops, excluding those in covered shopping complexes and department stores, trading predominantly in furniture,
floor coverings, cycles, perambulators, large domestic appliances or other bulky goods, or trading on a wholesale
self-selection basis (cash and carry).
40
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 2.3
Limitations on travel distances
Maximum travel distance(1)
Purpose
group
Use of the building
or part of the building
where travel is possible in –
One direction
only (m)
More than one
direction (m)
2(a)
Institutional
9
18
2(b)
Other residential –
(a)
in bedrooms
(b)
in bedroom corridors
(c)
elsewhere
9(2)
18(2)
9
18
35
35
3
Office
18(3)
45
4
Shop and commercial(4)
18(3)
45
5
Assembly and recreation –
(a)
buildings primarily for disabled people
(b)
schools
(c)
areas with seating in rows
(d)
elsewhere
9
18
15
18
18
45
32
45
6
Industrial(5)
25
45
7
Storage and other non-residential(5)
25
45
2, 3, 4,
5, 6
and 7
Place of special fire hazard(6)
9(2)
18(2)
Crèche
9
18
Plant room or rooftop plant –
(a)
distance within the room
(b)
escape route not in open air
(overall travel distance)
(c)
escape route in open air
(overall travel distance)
2, 3, 4,
5, 6
and 7
9
18
35
45
60
100
Notes:
(1) The dimensions in the Table are travel distances. If the internal layout of partitions, fittings, etc. is not known when
plans are deposited, direct distances may be used for assessment. The direct distance should be taken as two-thirds
of the travel distance.
(2) Maximum part of travel distance within the room.
(3) In the case of a small building described in paragraph 2.68 the maximum travel distance in one direction
only may be –
(a) increased to 27 m in the ground storey; and
(b) measured to the foot of the unprotected stairway in the basement or to the head of the unprotected stairway in the
first storey.
(4) Maximum travel distances within shopping malls are given in BS 5588-10. Guidance on associated smoke control
measures is given in BRE report Design methodologies for smoke and heat exhaust ventilation (BR 368).
BS 5588-10 applies more restrictive provisions to shop units with only one exit in covered shopping complexes.
(5) In industrial and storage buildings the appropriate travel distance depends on the level of fire risk associated with the
processes and materials being used. The dimensions given above assume that the building will be of normal fire risk.
If the building is high risk, then lesser distances of 12 m in one direction and 25 m in more than one direction, should
apply.
(6) Places of special fire hazard are listed in the definitions in paragraph 1.1.
41
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 2.4
Travel distance in single direction leading to alternative escape routes
see para 2.42
D
C
xº or more
B
A
Note:
If angle CBD is xº or more, alternative escape routes are available from B provided -
(a) either AC or AD is less than or equal to the maximum travel distance in more than one direction; and
(b) AB is less than or equal to the maximum travel distance in one direction only.
xº = 45º plus 2.5º for each metre or part of a metre travelled from A to B.
42
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Alternative escape routes
2.44
To prevent alternative escape routes being simultaneously unusable they
should either –
(a) be 45º or more apart (see Diagram 2.5); or
(b) if less than 45º apart be separated from each other by fire-resisting
construction.
Diagram 2.5
Alternative escape routes
see para 2.44(a) and Diagram 2.4
B
C
A
D
45º or
more
less than
45º
Note:
Acceptable alternative escape routes are available from A (so that either AB or AC is less than or equal to the
maximum travel distance in more than one direction) but not from D (therefore see Diagram 2.4).
43
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Inner rooms
2.45
An inner room is only permitted where –
(a) the number of occupants of the inner room is not more
than 60 people (or in the case of a building in
Purpose Group 2(a), 30 people);
(b) it is not a bedroom;
(c) the escape route from the inner room does not pass through more
than one access room;
(d) the distance from any point in the inner room to the nearest exit from
the access room does not exceed the appropriate maximum travel
distance in one direction only given in Table 2.3;
(e) the access room is not a place of special fire hazard and is in the
control of the same occupier as the inner room; and
(f)
one of the following applies –
(i)
that part of the enclosure separating the inner and access room
is stopped at least 500 mm below the ceiling;
(ii) a vision panel of not less than 0.1 m2 is provided in the
enclosure to the inner room so that a fire in the access room will
be visible from the inner room at an early stage; or
(iii) the access room is fitted with a suitable automatic detection and
alarm system to warn the occupants of the inner room of the
outbreak of a fire in the access room.
See Diagram 2.6.
Diagram 2.6
Inner rooms and access rooms
see para 2.45
access room
room with
alternative
exits
inner room
(a) Not an inner room
(b) Inner room
44
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Crèches
2.46
Where a building has an ancillary use for child care the accommodation for
children should be located in the ground storey adjacent to an external wall
and should have not less than two exits, one of which should be a final exit.
However, where location on the ground storey is not possible it should be
located as near ground level as possible provided that –
(a) it is adjacent to an external wall and it has not less than two exits, one
of which should be a storey exit;
(b) it is not located above the level at which the parents or guardians are
accommodated unless their escape route is through the upper level;
and
(c) it is not located on a basement storey unless it has an open side and a
final exit at ground level.
Access to storey exits
2.47
In any storey which has more than one escape stairway the escape routes
should be arranged so that people do not have to pass through one stairway
to reach another. However, it is acceptable to pass through the protected
lobby of one stairway to reach another escape stairway.
Open spatial planning
2.48
Escape routes should not be prejudiced by open connections between floors
such as at an escalator.
An escape route should not be within 5 m of the open connection unless –
(a) the direction of travel is away from the opening; or
(b) there is an alternative escape route which does not pass within 5 m of
the open connection.
See Diagram 2.7.
Planning of storey exits in a central core
2.49
A building with more than one storey exit in a central core should be planned
so that the storey exits are remote from each other and not linked by a lift
hall, lobby, or undivided corridor.
Where the central core is separated from the accommodation by a corridor,
the corridor should be subdivided by self-closing fire doors (and any
necessary associated screens) so that the storey exits are separated as in
Diagram 2.8.
45
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 2.7
Escape routes in relation to open connections between floors
see para 2.48
exit
C
5 m
A
opening
exit
B
exit
Note:
From A and B at least one direction of travel is away from the opening.
From C where the initial direction of travel is towards the opening, one of the escape
routes is not less than 5 m from the opening.
Diagram 2.8
Storey exits in a central core
see para 2.49
accommodation
alternative 
position for
fire-resisting door
shown dashed
corridor
lift
lift
F.D.
F.D.
toilets
washroom
services
etc
lift
lift
lift
lift
corridor
alternative 
position for
fire-resisting door
shown dashed
accommodation
Key
F.D.
fire-resisting door
fire-resisting
construction
46
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Storeys divided into different uses
2.50
Where a storey has an ancillary use for the consumption of food or drink by
customers, the area given over to that use should –
(a) have not less than two escape routes; and
(b) have escape routes that lead directly to a storey exit without entering a
kitchen or place of special fire hazard.
Storeys divided into different occupancies
2.51
Where a storey is divided into two or more occupancies (i.e. ownerships,
tenancies or similar) the means of escape from one occupancy should not
pass through any other occupancy.
However, where the means of escape includes a corridor common to two or
more occupancies then either it should be a protected corridor, or a fire
detection and fire alarm system to BS 5839-1, of at least Category L3
standard, should be installed.
Width of escape routes and storey exits
2.52
The width of an escape route or storey exit should be not less than the
minimum width given in Table 2.4, for the appropriate number of people
assessed as being likely to use it. There should be no projections into
escape routes other than handrails with a projection of less than 100 mm
and stringers, skirtings and architraves of less than 30 mm, on either or both
sides. (Note – for the purposes of Part H stair widths are measured between
handrails.) The width of a storey exit should be measured in accordance
with B1(g) of Appendix B.
Table 2.4
Widths of escape routes and storey exits
Maximum number
of people(1)
Minimum width(2)(3)
mm
50
750(4)
110
850
220
1100
More than 220
5 per person(5)
Notes:
(1) Assessed as being likely to use the escape route or storey exit.
(2) In schools the minimum width of corridors in pupil areas should be 1050 mm where
escape is in more than one direction and 1600 mm where escape is in one direction
only.
(3) Part R may require greater widths.
(4) May be reduced to 530 mm for gangways between fixed storage racking, other than in
public areas in Purpose Group 4 buildings.
(5) 5 mm per person does not apply to an opening serving less than 220 persons.
47
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Where there is a single escape route and storey exit their capacity should
be not less than the number of occupants of the storey.
Where two or more escape routes and storey exits are provided it should be
assumed that one of them may not be available due to fire or smoke.
Therefore, each storey exit in turn should be discounted in order to ensure
that the capacity of the remaining storey exits is adequate for the total
number of people needing to use them. [This may have implications for the
width of stairs because they should be not less than the width of any storey
exit leading onto them – see paragraph 2.63(b)].
2.53
The total number of persons which two or more available storey exits (after
discounting) can accommodate is found by adding the maximum number of
persons determined for each storey exit width. For example in Table 2.4
three available exits each 850 mm wide will accommodate 110 x 3 = 330
persons (not the 510 persons accommodated by a combined exit width of
2550 mm).
Separation of circulation routes from escape stairways
2.54
A protected stairway should not form part of the primary circulation route
between different parts of the building at the same level. However, it is
acceptable for a protected lobby to form part of the primary circulation route.
Protected corridors
2.55
A corridor that is part of the means of escape should be a protected corridor
where it is –
(a) a corridor serving one or more bedrooms;
(b) a corridor from which escape is in one direction only (i.e. a dead end
corridor); or
(c) common to two or more different occupancies other than where a fire
detection and alarm system is installed in accordance with paragraph
2.51.
Subdivision of corridors
2.56
Where a corridor exceeding 12 m in length connects two or more storey
exits, it should be subdivided by self-closing fire doors (and any necessary
associated fire-resisting screens) approximately mid-way between the
storey exits so that no undivided part is common to two or more storey exits.
This is to reduce the likelyhood of smoke making alternative routes
impassible before all occupants have escaped. For corridors around a
central core see paragraph 2.49.
Where a dead end portion of a corridor exceeding 4.5 m in length leads to a
point where alternative escape routes are available, the dead end portion
should be extended and separated by self-closing fire doors (and any
necessary associated fire-resisting screens) from the remainder of the
corridor as shown in Diagram 2.9. However, where the stairways and
corridors are protected by a pressurization system complying with
BS EN 12101-6, such separation is not necessary.
48
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 2.9
Dead end corridors
see para 2.56
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
(a) T–junction with main corridor
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
F.D.
Key
F.D.
fire-resisting door
(b) Continuation past stairway
fire-resisting construction
protected corridor
49
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Enclosure of corridors that are not protected corridors
2.57
Where a corridor which is part of an escape route, but is not a protected
corridor, is enclosed by partitions, those partitions provide some defence
against the spread of smoke in the early stages of a fire and should be
carried up to the underside of the structural floor or to a suspended ceiling.
In the latter case cavity barriers should be provided in accordance with
paragraph 4.35. Every opening into a room should be fitted with a door
which need not be a fire door.
External escape routes
2.58
Where an external escape route, other than a stair, is beside an external
wall of the building, that part of the external wall within 1.8 m (measured
horizontally) of the escape route should be of fire-resisting
construction 1.1 m above and 9 m below the level of the route as shown in
Diagram 2.11 (see page 61).
Escape over flat roofs
2.59
Where more than one escape route is available from a storey, (or part of a
building where appropriate) one of those routes may be by way of a flat roof,
provided that –
(a) the route does not serve –
(i)
a building of Purpose Group 2(a); or
(ii) in a building of any other purpose group – an area intended for
use by members of the public;
(b) the flat roof is part of the same building from which escape is being
made;
(c) the route across the flat roof leads to a storey exit or external escape
route;
(d) the part of the flat roof forming the escape route and its supporting
structure, together with any opening in the roof within 3 m of the
escape route, is fire-resisting; and
(e) the route is defined and guarded by walls and/or protective barriers
which comply with Part H.
50
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Vertical part of the escape route
2.60
The provisions in paragraphs 2.61 to 2.76 relate to the vertical escape down
or up escape stairways towards a final exit. They are mainly concerned with
providing a sufficient number of escape stairs of adequate aggregate width
and their protection.
Number of escape stairways
2.61
The number of escape stairways in a building, or part of a building is
determined by the provisions in –
(a) paragraph 2.39 regarding independent escape routes from areas in
certain uses;
(b) paragraphs 2.41 and 2.43 regarding the design of the horizontal part
of the escape route;
(c) paragraphs 2.63 and 2.64 regarding the width of stairs and the
discounting of a stairway respectively; and
(d) Section 6 regarding the provision and location of firefighting stairways.
Single escape stairways
2.62
Where independent escape routes are not required from areas in different
purpose groups, in accordance with paragraph 2.39, a single escape
stairway may serve –
(a) a basement which is permitted to have a single escape route in
accordance with paragraph 2.41; or
(b) a building which has no storey with a floor level more than 11 m above
ground level, and in which every storey is permitted to have a single
escape route in accordance with paragraph 2.41.
Width of escape stairs
2.63
An escape stair should be wide enough to accommodate the appropriate
number of people assessed as being likely to use it.
This width depends on the number of stairways provided and whether the
escape strategy is based on simultaneous evacuation (see paragraph 2.65)
or phased evacuation (see paragraph 2.66).
In any event an escape stair should –
(a) be not less than the appropriate dimension given in Table 2.5;
(b) be not less than the width required for any storey exit giving
access to it;
(c) not reduce in width at any point on its way to the final exit; and
(d) not exceed 1400 mm if the vertical extent of the escape stair is more
than 30 m, unless it is at least 1800 mm and it is provided with a
central handrail. In such a case the width on each side of the handrail
should be considered separately for the purpose of assessing stair
capacity. (Research indicates that people prefer to stay within reach of
a handrail when making a prolonged descent, consequently the centre
part of a wide stair is little used and could be hazardous).
51
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 2.5
Minimum width of escape stairs
Situation of stair
Maximum number of
people served(1)
Minimum stair width
(mm)
1
In a Purpose Group 2(a) building (unless
it will only be used by staff)
150
1000
2
In a Purpose Group 5 building and serving an
area used for assembly purposes (unless
the area is less than 100 m2)
220
1100
3
In a building of any other purpose group
and serving an area with an occupancy of
more than 50
Over 220
Note (2)
4
Any stair not described above
50
800
Notes:
(1) Assessed as likely to use the stair in a fire emergency.
(2) See Table 2.6 for sizing stairs for simultaneous evacuation and Table 2.7 for phased evacuation.
Discounting of escape stairways
2.64
Whether simultaneous or phased evacuation is used, where two or more
escape stairways are provided it should be assumed that one of them may
not be available due to fire or smoke. Therefore, each stairway in turn
should be discounted in order to ensure that the capacity of the remaining
stairways is adequate for the total number of people needing to use them.
This discounting provision need not be applied where –
(a) the escape stairways are approached on each storey (except the
topmost storey), through a protected lobby; or
(b) the escape stairways are protected by pressurization systems
designed in accordance with BS EN 12101-6,
however, discounting storey exits still needs to be considered (see
parargaph 2.52).
Simultaneous evacuation
2.65
In a building or part of a building designed for simultaneous evacuation the
escape stairways should have the capacity to allow all floors to be
evacuated simultaneously and a suitable fire detection and fire alarm
system to BS 5839-1, should be installed.
Simultaneous evacuation should be used for –
(a) a basement;
(b) a building containing open spatial planning;
(c) a building of Purpose Group 2; and
(d) a building of Purpose Group 5.
52
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Where simultaneous evacuation is to be used the capacity of an escape
stairway should be either –
(i)
in a building of not more than 10 storeys and for basements – that
given for the appropriate width of escape stairs in Table 2.6; or
(ii) in a building of more than 10 storeys – that derived from the formula –
P = 200w + 50(w – 0.3)(n – 1) for stairs not less than 1100 mm wide,
where
P =
the number of people that can be accommodated;
w =
the width of the escape stair (in metres); and
n =
the number of storeys served by the stair.
Table 2.6
Capacity of escape stairways for simultaneous evacuation
Number
of floors
served
Maximum number of people accommodated on one stair of width
1000 mm
1100 mm
1200 mm
1300 mm
1400 mm
1500 mm
1600 mm
1700 mm
1800 mm
1
150
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
2
190
260
285
310
335
360
385
410
435
3
230
300
330
360
390
420
450
480
510
4
270
340
375
410
445
480
515
550
585
5
310
380
420
460
500
540
580
620
660
6
350
420
465
510
555
600
645
690
735
7
390
460
510
560
610
660
710
760
810
8
430
500
555
610
665
720
775
830
885
9
470
540
600
660
720
780
840
900
960
10
510
580
645
710
775
840
905
970
1035
53
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Worked examples
A building comprises 12 storeys of offices (ground + 11). What is the
minimum width needed for the stairs serving the office floors with a
population of 1200 people (excluding the ground floor population which does
not use the stairs), using simultaneous evacuation? Two stairs satisfy the
travel distance limitations.
(a)
The population is distributed evenly.
As the top office storey is at a height greater than 18 m, both stairs
need added protection (see paragraph 2.69). Therefore, if both stairs
are entered at each level via a protected lobby, then both stairs can be
assumed to be available (see paragraph 2.64).
P = 1200/2 = 600, n = 11
From the formula –
600 = 200w + 50(w - 0.3)(11 - 1)
600 = 200w + (50w - 15)(10)
600 = 200w + 500w - 150
750 = 700w
w = 1.07 m (1070 mm)
Therefore, both stairs should be at least 1070 mm wide. But this
needs to be increased to 1100 mm as the formula applies to stairs
1100 mm or wider (see paragraph 2.65).
This width should also be adequate to comply with paragraph 2.63
when one storey exit is discounted in accordance with paragraph 2.52
(i.e. the stair widths are not less than the minimum widths needed
for 109 people in Table 2.4).
(b)
The population is not distributed evenly (e.g. 1000 people occupy
floors 1 to 9, and 200 occupy floors 10 to 11).
As the top office storey is at a height greater than 18 m, both stairs
need added protection (see paragraph 2.69). If both stairs are entered
at each level via a protected lobby, then both stairs can be assumed to
be available (see paragraph 2.64).
(i) To find the width of the stairs serving floors 10 to 11 –
P = 200/2 = 100, n = 2
From the formula –
100 = 200w + 50(w - 0.3)(2 - 1)
100 = 200w + (50w - 15)(1)
100 = 200w + 50w - 15
115 = 250w
w = 0.46 m (460 mm)
Therefore, both stairs between the 9th floor landing and the top floor
should be at least 460 mm. But this needs to be increased to 1100 mm
as the formula applies to stairs 1100 mm or wider (see paragraph
2.65).
54
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

This width should also be adequate to comply with paragraph 2.63
when one storey exit is discounted in accordance with paragraph 2.52
(i.e. the stair widths are not less than the minimum widths needed
for 100 people in Table 2.4).
(ii) To find the width of the stairs serving floors 1 to 9 –
P = 1200/2 = 600, n = 9
From the formula:
600 = 200w + 50 (w - 0.3) (9 - 1)
600 = 200w + (50w - 15) (8)
600 = 200w + 400w - 120
720 = 600w
w = 1.20 m (1200 mm)
Therefore, both stairs between the 9th floor landing and the ground
floor should be at least 1200 mm wide.
This width should also be adequate to comply with paragraph 2.63
when one storey exit is discounted in accordance with paragraph 2.52
(i.e. the stair widths are not less than the minimum widths needed
for 111 people in Table 2.4).
Phased evacuation
2.66
In certain buildings it may be advantageous to design the escape stairways
on the concept of phased evacuation. With phased evacuation the first
people to be evacuated are those on the floor of the fire and the floor above
together with those in the building who have reduced mobility.
Subsequently, if there is a need to evacuate more people, it should be done
two floors at a time.
In such a building, or part of a building –
(a) every escape stairway should be approached through a protected
lobby or protected corridor at each storey, other than at a top storey
consisting exclusively of plant rooms;
(b) a protected lobby at each storey should be provided to the approach
to every lift that is not within the enclosure of a protected stairway
other than at a top storey consisting exclusively of plant rooms;
(c) every floor should be a compartment floor;
(d) an automatic sprinkler system complying with the relevant
recommendations of BS 5306-2 or BS EN 12845, should be installed
throughout the building where the building has a storey more
than 30 m above ground level;
(e) an automatic fire detection and fire alarm system, to BS 5839-1, of at
least Category L3 standard, should be installed;
(f)
a voice alarm system to BS 5839-8 should be installed throughout the
building, or part of the building; and
(g) an emergency voice communication system to BS 5839-9 should be
installed with a master station at fire and rescue access level
(see Section 6) and an outstation on every storey.
55
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

The minimum width of a stair for phased evacuation should be that given in
Table 2.7 for the appropriate maximum number of people on the most
heavily occupied storey.
Worked example
A building comprises 12 storeys of offices (ground + 11). What is the
minimum width needed for the stairs serving the office floors with a
population of 1200 people (excluding the ground floor population which does
not use the stairs), using phased evacuation? Two stairs satisfy the travel
distance limitations.
As the top office storey is at a height greater than 18 m, both stairs need
added protection (see paragraph 2.69). Therefore if both stairs are entered
at each level via a protected lobby, then both stairs can be assumed to be
available (see paragraph 2.64).
The population is divided equally therefore –
The number of people per storey is (1200/11) = 109.
Each stair must be able to accommodate half the maximum number of
people in each storey (109/2) = 55 people.
From Table 2.7 the width of 1 stair to accommodate 55 people is
1000 mm (maximum capacity 100 people).
Both stairs need to be not less than 1000 mm wide.
This width will also be adequate when one storey exit is discounted in
accordance with paragraph 2.52 and the consequent need to comply
with paragraph 2.63 (i.e. the stair widths are not less than the
minimum widths needed for people in Table 2.4).
Table 2.7
Minimum width of escape stairs for phased evacuation
Maximum number of people in any storey(1)
Stair width(2) (mm)
100
1000
120
1100
130
1200
140
1300
150
1400
160
1500
170
1600
180
1700
190
1800
Notes:
(1) Where the number of people (P) on the most heavily occupied storey is more than 190, the minimum width of the
escape stair (W mm) should be calculated from W = (P x 10) – 100.
(2) Where the stair serves a storey more than 30 m above ground level the width should not exceed 1400 mm
[see paragraph 2.63(d)].
56
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Protection of escape stairways
2.67
An escape stairway requires protection in order that it may provide an area
of relative safety during a fire evacuation. The provisions for protecting an
internal escape stairway are given in paragraphs 2.69 to 2.73 and further
provisions apply when an escape stairway penetrates a compartment floor
(see paragraph 4.23) or is a firefighting stairway (see paragraphs 6.3 to 6.6).
An accommodation stairway may form part of an internal route to a storey
exit or final exit provided that the travel distance complies with paragraph
2.42 and the number of people involved is low.
2.68
An unprotected stairway may be used as an escape stairway in a small
building provided that –
(a) the building is of Purpose Group 3 or 4 and is not used for bar or
restaurant purposes;
(b) the building is designed for single occupancy;
(c) the building comprises not more than a basement, ground and first
storey;
(d) the floor area of any storey is not more than 90 m2;
(e) the stair does not connect more than two storeys; and
(f)
the stair discharges not more than 3 m from a final exit.
Protected lobbies and protected corridors
2.69
A protected lobby or protected corridor should be provided to every escape
stairway on every storey in a building other than the top storey where –
(a) the escape stairway is the only escape stairway serving the building
(or part of the building) and the building (or part of the building) has
more than one storey above or more than one storey below the storey
containing the final exit from the escape stairway;
(b) the escape stairway serves a storey more than 18 m above ground
level;
(c) the building is designed for phased evacuation and the top storey
consists exclusively of plant rooms; or
(d) the discounting stairway provisions have not been used in calculating
escape stair widths as permitted by paragraph 2.64.
A protected lobby should also be provided between an escape stairway and
a place of special fire hazard, and that lobby should have either not less
than 0.4 m2 of permanent ventilation or be protected from the ingress of
smoke by a mechanical smoke control system.
57
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Exits from protected stairways
2.70
Every protected stairway should discharge either –
(a) directly to a final exit; or
(b) to a protected exit passageway leading only to a final exit. Where the
stairway is lobbied, any door openings in the walls enclosing the
protected exit passageway should be similarly lobbied.
Where the escape route from an escape stairway also forms the escape
route from the ground and/or basement storey its width should be increased
accordingly.
Separation of adjoining protected stairways and protected exit
passageways
2.71
Where two or more protected stairways or protected exit passageways
adjoin they should be separated by an imperforate enclosure.
Use of space within protected stairways
2.72
A protected stairway, other than a firefighting stairway (see Section 6),
should not contain any accommodation or services other than –
(a) sanitary accommodation or wash rooms provided that they are not
used as a cloakroom;
(b) a lift, provided that in a building (or part of a building) with a single
escape stairway the lift motor room is over the lift shaft or outside the
protected stairway; and
(c) where it is not the only protected stairway in a building (or part of a
building) –
(i)
a reception desk or enquiry office area having an area of not
more than 10 m2 and located at ground or access level; or
(ii) a cupboard formed by fire-resisting construction.
Basement stairways
2.73
Where an escape stairway forms part of the only escape route from an
upper storey of a building (or part of a building) it should not serve a
basement storey.
Where there is more than one escape stairway from an upper storey of a
building (or part of a building) at least one should terminate at ground storey
level. Other stairways may connect to a basement storey provided that they
are protected at each basement level by a protected lobby or protected
corridor.
58
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

External walls adjacent to protected stairways
2.74
Where a protected stairway projects beyond, is recessed from, or is in an
internal angle of the external walls of the building – the distance between
any unprotected areas (see Section 5) in the adjacent external walls of the
building and an unprotected area in the external walls of the protected
stairway should not be less than 1.8 m, as shown in Diagram 2.10.
External escape stairs
2.75
Where more than one escape route is available from a storey (or part of a
building), one or more than one, of those routes may be by way of an
external escape stair provided that –
(a) there is at least one internal escape stairway from every part of each
storey; and
(b) in the case of –
(i)
a building of Purpose Group 5 – the route is not intended for
use by members of the public; or
(ii) a building of Purpose Group 2 – the route serves only staff
accommodation (office or residential).
Diagram 2.10 External walls adjacent to protected stairways
see para 2.74
accommodation
accommodation
accommodation
1.8 m
1.8 m
1.8 m
stairway
stairway
stairway
1.8 m
1.8 m
accommodation
accommodation
accommodation
(a) projecting stairway
(b) recessed stairway
(c) internal angle
Key
fire-resisting walls
external walls which
may be unprotected
areas
59
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

2.76
Where an external stair is part of an escape route –
(a) the stair should be protected from the weather when it serves a floor
or flat roof more than 6 m above ground level. The degree of
protection from the weather will depend on the exposure of the stair;
(b) all doors giving access to the stair should be fire-resisting except at
the top of any stair which leads downwards;
(c) any part of the external walls within 1.8 m of the stair (measured
horizontally) should be of fire-resisting construction –
(i)
1.8 m above (this may be reduced to 1.1 m at the top landing of
the stair provided that it is not the top landing of a basement
stair);
(ii) 1.8 m at the side of; and
(iii) 9 m below,
the flights and landings of the stair as shown on Diagram 2.11;
(d) the external walls of the building within 1.8 m of the escape route from
the bottom of the stair should be fire-resisting to a height of
1.1 m above the escape route; and
(e) glazing in fire-resisting external walls described in (c) and (d) above
should also be fire-resisting and fixed shut (see Table 2.8 for the
limitations on the use of uninsulated glazing).
60
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 2.11 Fire resistance of external walls adjacent to external escape routes
see para 2.58 and 2.76
the 1.8 m zone above the top 
landing of the stair may be 
reduced to 1.1 m provided that 
the top landing is not part of a 
basement stair
window – 30 minutes
fire resistance
fixed shut
door – no fire resistance
required
1.8 m
1.8 m
1.8 m
1.1 m 
above 
escape route
1.8 m
F.D.
9 m
F.D.
elevation a
Example A
the 1.8 m zone above the top 
landing of the stair may be 
reduced to 1.1 m provided that 
the top landing is not part of a 
basement stair
1.8 m 
above top 
landing
1.8 m 
above top 
landing
F.D.
1.8 m
6 m maximum
for stair to be
unprotected from
the weather
1.8 m
1.8 m
1.8 m from landing
elevation b1
elevation b2
1.8 m
1.8 m
1.8 m
Key
Within 1.8 m of the escape route from
the bottom of the stair should be
fire-resisting to a height of 1.1 m
F.D.
fire-resisting door
fire-resisting area of wall
plan 
escape
route
Example B
1.8 m
61
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 2.8
Limitations on the use of uninsulated glazing in enclosures and fire doors
on escape routes
Permitted extent of glazing in parts of a
building with access to –
Position of glazed element
A single stair
More than one stair
Walls
Door leaf
Walls
Door leaf
A
Purpose Group 1(b) and (c)
1
Within the enclosures of a protected stairway or
within fire-resisting separation shown in
Diagram 2.3
Fixed
fanlights only
Unlimited
Fixed
fanlights only
Unlimited
2
Within the enclosures of an existing stair
Unlimited
Unlimited
Unlimited
Unlimited
3
Within fire-resisting separation described in
paragraph 2.12(a)
Nil below
0.1 m(2)
Nil below
0.1 m(2)
Nil below
0.1 m(2)
Nil below
0.1 m(2)
unlimited
above 0.1 m
unlimited
above 0.1 m
unlimited
above 0.1 m
unlimited
above 0.1 m
4
Between an attached/integral garage and a
dwellinghouse
Not
applicable
Nil
Not
applicable
Nil
B
All other purpose groups
5
Between residential/sleeping accommodation
and a common escape route (corridor, lobby or
stair)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
6
Between a protected stairway(1) and –
Nil
25% of door
area
Nil below
1.1 m
unlimited
above 1.1 m
50% of door
area
(i)
the accommodation; or
(ii)
a corridor which is not a protected
corridor.
Other than in item 5 above
7
Between –
Nil below
1.1 m
unlimited
above 1.1 m
Nil below
0.1 m(2)
Nil below
0.1 m(2)
Nil below
0.1m(2)
(i)
a protected stairway and a protected
lobby or protected corridor; or
unlimited
above 0.1 m
unlimited
above 0.1 m
unlimited
above 0.1 m
(ii)
accommodation and a protected lobby.
Other than in item 5 above
8
Between the accommodation and a protected
corridor forming a dead end.
Other than in item 5 above
Nil below
1.1 m
unlimited
above 1.1 m
Nil below
0.1 m(2)
Not
applicable
Not
applicable
unlimited
above 0.1 m
9
Between accommodation and any other corridor;
or subdividing corridors.
Other than in item 5 above.
Not
applicable
Not
applicable
Nil below
0.1 m(2)
Nil below
0.1 m(2)
unlimited
above 0.1 m
unlimited
above 0.1 m
62
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 2.8
Limitations on the use of uninsulated glazing in enclosures and fire doors
on escape routes (cont’d)
Permitted extent of glazing in parts of a building with
access to –
Position of glazed element
A single stair
More than one stair
Walls
Door leaf
Walls
Door leaf
B
All other purpose groups
10
Adjacent an external escape route described in
paragraph 2.58
Unlimited
above 1.1 m
from level of
route
Unlimited
above 1.1 m
from level of
route
Unlimited
above 1.1 m
from level of
route
Unlimited
above 1.1 m
from level of
route
11
Adjacent an external escape stair described in
paragraph 2.76
Not
applicable
Not
applicable
Unlimited
Unlimited
Notes:
All heights should be measured vertically from the floor, the landing level, the stair pitch line or the external
escape route.
(1) If the protected stairway is also a protected shaft (see Section 4) or a firefighting stairway (see Section 6) there
may be further restrictions on the uses of glazed elements.
(2) The 0.1 m limit is intended to limit the probability of fire spread from a floor covering.
Provision of refuges
2.77
Refuges are relatively safe areas for disabled people to wait for short
periods before completing their evacuation. They are not areas where
disabled people should be left to wait for rescue by the Fire and Rescue
Service, or to wait until the fire is extinguished.
A refuge should be provided for each protected stairway affording egress
from each storey, except storeys consisting exclusively of plant rooms. A
refuge should also be provided at each final exit that leads unto an external
flight of steps (in this case the refuge may be external). However, refuges
are not required in a small building in single occupancy which comprises not
more than a basement, a ground floor and a first storey with the floor area of
each storey not more than 280 m2.
Note – Whilst a refuge should be provided for each stairway, they need not
necessarily be located within the stair enclosure but should enable direct
access to the stair. The number of refuge spaces need not necessarily equal
the sum of the number of wheelchair users who can be present in the
building. The use of refuges forms part of the management plan and it may
be that more than one disabled person will use a single refuge as they pass
through as part of the evacuation procedure.
63
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 2.12 Refuge in a stair
see para. 2.78
Provision where access to the wheelchair space is
counter to the access flow within the stairway
Wheelchair space
Occupied by escape flow
Diagram 2.13 Refuge formed by compartmentation
see para 2.78
Storey divided into two refuges by compartment wall
(stairways not provided with wheelchair space).
Note: 
Persons occupying the left-hand compartment would not reach a refuge until they had entered the
right-hand compartment. Two doorsets in the partition are necessary in case access to one of the doorsets is
blocked by fire.
64
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

2.78
The following are examples of satisfactory refuges –
(a) an enclosure such as a protected stairway (see diagram 2.12) or
protected lobby, protected corridor or compartment (see diagram
2.13); and
(b) an area in the open air such as a flat roof, balcony, podium or similar
place which is sufficiently protected (or remote) from any fire risk and
provided with its own means of escape.
Where a refuge is within a pressurised stair the smoke control system
should be in accordance with BS EN 12101-6.
2.79
Each refuge should provide an area accessible to a wheelchair of at least
900 mm x 1400 mm in which a wheelchair user can await assistance.
Where a refuge is in a protected stairway or protected lobby or protected
corridor the wheelchair space should not reduce the width of the escape
route. Where the wheelchair space is within a protected stairway, access to
the wheelchair space should not obstruct the flow of persons escaping.
2.80
Refuges and evacuation lifts should be clearly identified by appropriate
signs. Where a refuge is in a lobby or stairway the sign should be
accompanied by a blue mandatory sign worded “Refuge - keep clear”.
2.81
To facilitate the effective evacuation of people temporarily waiting in each
refuge an emergency voice communication system should be provided. It is
essential that the occupants of each refuge are able to alert other people
that they are in need of assistance and for them to be reassured that their
presence in the refuge is known and that assistance will be forthcoming.
The emergency voice communication system should either -
(a) comply with BS 5939-9 and consist of a Type B outstation at each
refuge which communicates with a master station located in the
building control room (where provided) or adjacent to the fire alarm
panel; or
(b) in some buildings, it may be more appropriate to use an alternative
approach such as the use of wireless technology. Such technology
needs to be readily operated by, and comprehensible to disabled
people.
Evacuation lifts
2.82
In general, it is not appropriate to use a lift when there is a fire in the
building. However, in some circumstances a suitably sited and protected lift
containing certain safety features may be used for evacuating people.
Guidance on the design, location and use of an evacuation lift is given
in BS 5588-8. The evacuation lift installation should conform with
BS EN 81-1 or BS EN 81-2 as appropriate for the particular type of lift.
2.83
For general provisions relating to the fire protection of lift installations, see
paragraphs 2.99 and 2.100.
65
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

General provisions
2.84
The provisions in paragraphs 2.85 to 2.103 relate to the construction and
protection of escape routes, some service installations and other matters
associated with the design of escape routes.
Fire resistance
2.85
Details of fire resistance test criteria and standards of performance are
given in Section 4.
All walls, partitions and other enclosures (including roofs that form part of an
escape route) required to have fire resistance to meet the provisions of this
Section should have the appropriate performance given in Tables 4.1 and
4.2. Where glazed elements in such enclosures are only able to satisfy the
relevant performance in respect of integrity (i.e. uninsulated glazing), their
use should be limited in accordance with Table 2.8.
All doors required to have fire resistance to meet the provisions of this
Section should have the appropriate performance given in Table 4.5, should
be self-closing and the extent of any uninsulated glazing should be in
accordance with Table 2.8.
Seating and gangways
2.86
Permanent or retractable seating for closely seated audiences or spectators
should be designed in accordance with Clauses 8.1 to 8.4 of BS 5588-6.
Doors on escape routes
2.87
In general doors on escape routes, whether fire doors or not, should only be
fitted with locks or fastenings which are readily operated from the side
approached by a person making an escape. The operation of such a lock or
fastening should not involve the use of a key or the manipulation of more
than one mechanism.
However, a door to a room may be locked when the room is not occupied
provided that –
(a) it is not an access room to an inner room; or
(b) it is not part of an escape route for people in other parts of the
building.
Where a door on an escape route has to be secured against entry when the
building or part of the building is occupied, it should only be fitted with a lock
or fastening which is readily operated, without a key, from the side
approached by people making their escape. Similarly, where a secure door
is operated by a code, combination, swipe or proximity card, biometric data
or similar means, it should also be capable of being overriden from the side
approached by people making their escape. Electrically powered locks
should return to the unlocked position –
(i)
on operation of the fire alarm system;
(ii) on loss of power or system failure; and
66
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

(iii) on activation of a manual door release unit (Type A) to BS EN 54-11
positioned at the door on the side approached by people making their
escape. Where the door provides escape in either direction, a unit
should be installed on both sides of the door.
2.88
In the case of places of assembly, shop and commercial buildings, doors on
escape routes from rooms with an occupant capacity of more than 60
should either not be fitted with lock, latch or bolt fastenings, or be fitted with
panic fastenings in accordance with BS EN 1125.
Direction of opening of doors
2.89
Doors on escape routes should, as far as practicable, open in the direction
of escape. Doors should always open in the direction of escape in the
following situations –
(a) from a place of special fire hazard;
(b) in the case of a building of Purpose Group 6 or 7 – where the number
of occupants is more than 10; and
(c) in the case of a building of any other purpose group – where the
number of people likely to use the door in the event of a fire is more
than 60.
Doors on escape routes should open through not less than 90° and swing
clear of any change in floor level, other than a threshold or single step (with
a rise of not more than 170 mm) on the line of the doorway. At no point of its
swing should a door reduce the effective width of any escape route across a
landing.
A door that opens towards a corridor should be recessed to prevent its
swing from encroaching on the effective width of the corridor.
2.90
Revolving doors, automatic doors and turnstiles should not be permitted
across escape routes unless –
(a) they have non-automatic swing doors of the required width
immediately adjacent;
(b) they are of the required width and easily openable in an emergency; or
(c) where the doors are automatic –
(i)
they are of the required width and fail safe to the open position;
or
(ii) they are of the required width and are provided with a monitored
failsafe system for opening the doors if the main electricity
supply fails.
67
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Vision panels in doors
2.91
A glazed vision panel, or panels of not less than 0.1 m2, should be provided
in a door that subdivides a corridor, or where a door swings both ways.
The vision panel or panels should include –
(a) a lower zone of visibility not more than 500 mm to not less
than 800 mm; and
(b) an upper zone of visibility not more than 1150 mm to not
less than 1500 mm,
measured from the floor and located towards the leading edge of the door.
See Diagram 2.14.
Height and width of escape routes
2.92
All escape routes should have a clear headroom of not less than 2 m and
there should be no projections below this height, except for door frames.
The width of an escape route should be measured at 1.5 m above floor level
or pitch line. The projection of handrails, if less than 100 mm, and stringers,
skirtings and architraves if less than 30 mm, on either or both sides should
be ignored.
The width of an escape doorway from a room should be taken as the clear
width when the door is open (see Diagram B.6).
Diagram 2.14 Vision panels in doors
see para 2.91
not less than
150 mm
1500 mm
1150 mm
minimum
zones of
visibility
800 mm
500 mm
Zones of visibility
68
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Construction of escape stairs
2.93
Other than in a dwellinghouse every escape stair and its associated
landings should be constructed of materials of limited combustibility
where –
(a) it is the only stair serving the building (or part of the building), unless
the building is of two or three storeys and is of Purpose Group 1(a) or
Purpose Group 3;
(b) it is within a basement storey, unless it is within a flat with more than
one storey;
(c) the height to any storey which it serves is more than 18 m above
ground or final exit level;
(d) it is a firefighting stairway (see Section 6); or
(e) it is external, except in the case of a stair that connects the final exit
level with a floor or flat roof less than 6 m above or below final exit
level.
Combustible materials may be added to the upper surface of these stairs
except in the case of firefighting stairways.
Helical stairs and spiral stairs
2.94
Helical stairs or spiral stairs may form part of an escape route (other than for
the evacuation of disabled people or for the evacuation of pupils in schools)
provided that they are designed in accordance with
BS 5395: Part 2. Helical stairs and spiral stairs should be of Type E (public
stair) where they are intended to be used by the public.
Final exits
2.95
A final exit should –
(a) have a width not less than the width of the escape route it serves, the
width of a final exit doorway should be measured in accordance with
B.1(g) of Appendix B;
(b) be sited to ensure rapid dispersal to a place of safety;
(c) be readily apparent to people who need to use it; and
(d) be sited clear of any fire hazards including fire or smoke issuing from a
basement, and from openings to transformer rooms, solid waste
stores, boiler rooms and similar hazards.
69
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Lighting of escape routes
2.96
Other than in a dwellinghouse all escape routes should have adequate
artificial lighting.
The areas listed in Table 2.9 should also have escape lighting, which will
illuminate the escape route if the mains supply fails. Standards for the
installation of escape lighting are given in BS 5266-1.
Escape lighting to escape stairways should be on a separate circuit to that
supplying any other part of the escape route or building.
Table 2.9
Provisions for escape lighting
Purpose group of the building
or part of the building
Areas requiring escape lighting
Purpose Group 2
All common escape routes(1)
Purpose Groups 3, 4(2), 6 and 7(a)
(a)
Underground or windowless accommodation
(b)
Stairways in a central core or serving storey(s) more
than 18 m above ground level
(c)
Internal corridors more than 30 m long
(d)
Open-plan areas more than 60 m2
Purpose Groups 4(3) and 7(b)
All escape routes(1) (except in a shop of not more than
three storeys, with no sales floor greater than 280 m2,
provided that the shop is not a restaurant or bar)
Purpose Group 5
All escape routes(1) and accommodation except for–
(a)
accommodation open on one side to view sport or
entertainment during daylight hours; and
(b)
parts of school buildings with natural light and used
only during normal school hours
All purpose groups
(a)
All toilet accommodation having a floor area more
than 8 m2
(b)
Windowless toilet accommodation having a floor area
not more than 8 m2
(c)
Electricity generator rooms
(d)
Switch room/battery room for emergency lighting
system
(e)
Emergency control room
Notes:
(1) Including external escape routes.
(2) Those areas of the building to which the public are not admitted.
(3) Those areas of the building to which the public are admitted.
70
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Protected power circuits
2.97
Where it is critical for electrical circuits to be able to continue to function
during a fire, protected circuits are needed. The potential for damage to
cables forming protected circuits should be limited by the use of sufficiently
robust cables, careful selection of cable routes and/or by the provision of
physical protection in areas where cables may be susceptable to damage.
Methods of cable support should generally be non-combustible and such
that circuit integrity will not be reduced below that afforded by the cable.
A protected circuit for operation of equipment in the event of a fire should
consist of cables meeting at least the requirements for PH 30 classification
when tested in accordance with BS EN 50200 (incorporating Appendix E),
or equivalent standard. It should follow a route selected to pass only through
parts of the building in which the fire risk is negligible and should be
separate from any circuit provided for another purpose.
In large or complex buildings there may be fire protection systems that need
to operate for an extended period during a fire. Further guidance on the
selection of cables for such systems is given in BS 5839-1, BS 5266-1 and
BS 7346-6.
Exit signs
2.98
Other than in a dwellinghouse, exits on escape routes except those in
normal use for egress, should be marked with signs which are readily visible
so that the occupants of a building can clearly and readily see where the
exits are.
The signs should comply with the relevant requirements of BS 5499-1 and
BS 5499-4. (Advice on fire safety signs, including emergency escape signs,
is given in HSE publication: Safety signs and signals: guidance on
regulations.)
71
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Fire protection of lift installations
2.99
As lifts penetrate floors and are usually sited within or adjacent to circulation
routes they may prejudice the means of escape from the building. To
safeguard against this a lift and its associated machine room should comply
with the following provisions.
A lift should be –
(a) in a protected shaft where it penetrates a compartment floor (see
paragraph 4.25);
(b) within the enclosure of a protected stairway where permitted by
paragraph 2.72; or
(c) enclosed with fire-resisting construction where its siting prejudices the
means of escape.
A lift should not be continued down to serve a basement storey in a building
(or part of a building) the upper storeys of which are served by a single
escape stairway or if the lift is within the enclosure to an escape stairway
which is terminated at ground level.
A lift in a basement or enclosed car park should be approached through a
protected lobby or protected corridor unless it is in a protected stairway
enclosure.
A lift should be approached through a protected lobby or protected corridor
on a storey which contains a high fire risk area, if the lift also delivers
directly into a corridor serving sleeping accommodation.
Lift machine rooms should be sited over the lift shaft where practicable.
Where the lift is within a protected stairway which is the only protected
stairway in a building (or part of a building) the machine room should be
located outside the protected stairway, if it cannot be sited over the lift shaft.
In a building designed for phased evacuation, where the lift is not within a
protected stairway, the lift entrance should be separated from the floor area
on every storey by a protected lobby [see paragraph 2.66(b)].
2.100
A feature lift such as a wall-climber lift which rises within a large volume
such as a mall or atrium and is not in a conventional well, may be at risk if it
runs through a smoke reservoir. In which case care is needed to maintain
the integrity of the smoke reservoir and to protect the occupants of the lift.
Mechanical ventilation systems
2.101
A mechanical ventilation system should be designed so that in a fire
either –
(a) the air movement in the building is directed away from escape routes;
or
(b) the system is closed down.
Where the system re-circulates air it should comply with the provisions of
BS 5588-9 in respect of its operation under fire conditions.
72
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Where a pressurization system is installed in a protected stairway all
mechanical ventilation and air conditioning systems in the building should be
compatible with it when operating under fire conditions.
Waste chutes and storage
2.102
A room used for the storage of waste or containing a waste chute
should be –
(a) separated from other parts of the building by fire-resisting
construction;
(b) located outside protected stairways and protected lobbies; and
(c) accessed from the open air or from a protected lobby which has not
less than 0.2 m2 of permanent ventilation.
Shop store rooms
2.103
Where the siting of a fully enclosed walk-in store room within a shop
prejudices a means of escape it should be separated from the retail areas
by fire-resisting construction other than where –
(a) it is provided with an automatic fire detection and fire alarm system to
BS 5839-1 of at least Category L5 standard with a smoke detector or
detectors located in the store room; or
(b) it is fitted with an automatic sprinkler system complying with the
relevant recommendations of BS 5306-2 or BS EN 12845.
See Table 4.1, Item 14 (c).
73
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Section 3
Internal fire spread - Linings
3.1
This Section contains provisions to restrict the spread of flame over the
internal wall and ceiling linings and, in some locations, to limit the
contribution they will make to the growth of the fire. This Section should be
read in conjunction with paragraphs 1.7 to 1.11.
The choice of materials for wall and ceiling linings can significantly affect the
spread of a fire and its rate of growth, even though such linings are not likely
to be the materials first ignited. This choice is particularly important in
circulation spaces where linings may offer the main means by which fire
spreads, and where rapid spread is most likely to prevent occupants from
escaping.
Several properties of lining materials influence fire spread. These include
the ease of ignition and the rate at which the lining material gives off heat
when burning. The guidance relating to the European fire tests and
classification provides for control of internal fire spread through control of
these properties. This booklet does not give detailed guidance on other
properties such as the generation of smoke and fumes.
3.2
Provisions regarding linings within concealed spaces, above fire-protecting
suspended ceilings and enclosures to sanitary pipework are contained in
Section 4. Additional provisions regarding the internal surface of rooflights
are contained in Section 5.
3.3
This Section does not contain provisions regarding the upper surface of
floors and stairs because they are not significantly involved in a fire until it is
well developed. Consequently, they are not likely to contribute to the early
stages of fire spread that have most impact on the safety of occupants.
Furniture and fittings can have a major effect on fire spread but it is not
possible to control them under the Buildng Regulations. Consequently, they
are not covered by this booklet.
Classification of performance of materials or products (National
classification)
3.4
The surface spread of flame classification of a lining should be ascertained
by testing in accordance with BS 476: Part 7. The classifications given in
such tests are Classes 1, 2, 3 and 4. Class 0 is achieved where a lining
material or the surface of a composite product is either –
(a) composed throughout of materials of limited combustibility; or
(b) a Class 1 material which has when tested to BS 476: Part 6, a fire
propagation index (I) of not more than 12 and a sub-index (i1) of not
more than 6.
A composite material of limited combustibility which does not have a surface
complying with (a) or (b) should be classified by test.
Class 0 is the highest classification and Class 4 materials are not
acceptable.
74
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

3.5
The term thermoplastic material includes all synthetic polymeric materials
which have a softening point lower than 200ºC when tested to
BS EN ISO 306: Method A120 Plastics. For the purposes of this Section
(and Section 4) thermoplastic materials are classified as TP(a) rigid and
TP(a) flexible and TP(b) as follows –
(a) To be classified as TP(a) rigid, a thermoplastic material should be –
(i)
rigid solid PVC sheet;
(ii) solid polycarbonate sheet not less than 3 mm thick;
(iii) double or multiple skin rigid sheet of unplasticised PVC or
polycarbonate which achieves a classification of Class 1; or
(iv) a rigid product, a specimen of which (at the thickness of the
product as put on the market) when tested to BS 2782-0:
Method 508A, extinguishes before the flame reaches the first
mark and after removal of the burner, the flaming or afterglow
does not exceed 5 seconds.
(b) To be classified as TP(a) flexible, a thermoplastic material should be a
flexible product not greater than 1 mm thick which complies with the
Type C requirements of BS 5867: Part 2 when tested to BS 5438
Test 2 (excluding the cleansing procedure) with the flame applied to
the surface of the specimens for 5, 15, 20 and 30 seconds
respectively.
(c) To be classified as TP(b) a thermoplastic material should be –
(i)
rigid solid polycarbonate sheet less than 3 mm thick;
(ii) double or multiple skin polycarbonate sheet which does not
achieve a classification of Class 1; or
(iii) a product which, when a specimen of material between 1.5 mm
and 3 mm thick, tested to BS 2782-0: Method 508A, has a rate
of burning not greater than 50 mm per minute.
Note – Currently, no new guidance is possible on the assessment or
classification of thermoplastic materials under the European system since
there is no generally accepted European test procedure and supporting
comparative data.
3.6
Where a thermoplastic material is used as a lining to protect a wall or ceiling
but is not fully bonded to a non-thermoplastic substrate the surfaces of both
the thermoplastic material and the substrate should meet the provisions of
paragraph 3.10. However, where a thermoplastic material is fully bonded to
a non-thermoplastic substrate only the surface of the composite need meet
the provisions of paragraph 3.10.
75
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Classification of performance of materials or products (European
classification)
3.7
Performance in terms of reaction to fire to be met by construction products is
determined by Commission Decision 200/147/EC of 8th February 2000
implementing Council Directive 89/106/EEC as regards the classification of
the reaction to fire performance of construction products.
The fire classification of a lining product should be in accordance with
BS EN 13501-1 Fire classification of construction products and building
elements, Part 1: Classification using test data from reaction to fire tests.
The reaction to fire tests are –
(a) BS EN ISO 1182 Reaction to fire tests for building products –
Non-combustibility test;
(b) BS EN ISO 1716 Reaction to fire tests for building products –
Determination of the heat of combustion;
(c) BS EN 13823 Reaction to fire tests for building products – Building
products excluding floorings exposed to the thermal attack by a single
burning item;
(d) BS EN ISO 11925-2 Reaction to fire tests – Ignitability of building
products subjected to direct impingement of flame –
Part 2: Single-flame source test; and
(e) BS EN 13238 Reaction to fire tests for building products –
Conditioning procedures and general rules for selection of substrates.
The classifications given in BS EN ISO 13501-1 are A1, A2, B, C, D, E and
F. Class A1 is the highest classification and Class F is the lowest.
Classes A2, B, C and D obtain an additional classification of –
(i)
s1, s2 or s3 regarding smoke production; and
(ii) d0, d1 or d2 regarding the production of flaming droplets and/or
particles.
Where a classification includes ‘s3,d2’ this means that there is no limit set for
smoke production and/or flaming droplets/particles.
3.8
National classifications do not automatically equate with the equivalent
European classifications therefore products cannot typically assume a
European class unless they have been tested accordingly.
Definition of wall and ceiling
3.9
For the purposes of the performance of wall and ceiling linings –
(a) a wall should include –
(i)
the surface of glazing (except glazing in a door); and
(ii) any part of a ceiling which slopes at an angle of more than 70º
to the horizontal;
76
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

(b) a wall should not include –
(i)
doors and door frames;
(ii) window frames and frames in which glazing is fitted;
(iii) architraves, cover moulds, picture rails, skirtings and similar
narrow members; and
(iv) fire surrounds, mantleshelves and fitted furniture;
(c) a ceiling should include –
(i)
the surface of glazing; and
(ii) any part of a wall which slopes at an angle of 70º or less to the
horizontal; and
(d) a ceiling should not include –
(i)
trap doors and their frames;
(ii) the frames of windows or rooflights and frames in which glazing
is fitted; and
(iii) architraves, cover moulds, picture rails, exposed beams and
similar narrow members.
Performance of wall and ceiling linings
3.10
The surface lining of a wall and of a ceiling should have a classification not
lower than the relevant Class given in Table 3.1, subject to the provisions of
paragraphs 3.11 to 3.16.
3.11
In a room any part of the surface of a wall may be of a Class lower than that
given in Table 3.1 [but not lower than Class 3 (National class) or
Class D-s3,d2 (European class)] if the total area of those parts in any one
room does not exceed either –
(a) half the floor area of the room; or
(b) (i) in the case of a building of Purpose Group 1 or 2 – 20 m2; or
(ii) in the case of a building of any other purpose group – 60 m2,
whichever is the lesser.
3.12
A suspended ceiling which is to contribute to the fire resistance of a
floor/ceiling assembly having a fire resistance of more than 60 minutes
should, in addition to having the classification given in Table 3.1, be
constructed of materials of limited combustibility (see Table 4.3).
3.13
The ceiling of a room may be constructed, either as a suspended or
stretched skin membrane, from panels of a thermoplastic material of the
TP(a) flexible classification provided that –
(a) each panel is supported on all its sides;
(b) each panel is not more than 5 m2 in area; and
(c) it is not a fire-resisting ceiling.
77
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 3.1
Surface classifications for walls and ceilings
Surface class for both walls and ceilings
Type of
building
Room(1) or circulation space
National
class(2)
European
class(2)(3)
Purpose
Groups 1 and 2
Rooms not exceeding 4 m2
3
D-s3,d2
Domestic garages not exceeding 40 m2
3
D-s3,d2
All other rooms (including garages exceeding 40 m2)
1
C-s3,d2
Circulation spaces (within a dwelling)
1
C-s3,d2
Circulation spaces (common areas)
0
B-s3,d2 or higher
All other
purpose groups
Rooms not exceeding 30 m2
3
D-s3,d2
All other rooms
1
C-s3,d2
Circulation spaces
0
B-s3,d2 or higher
Notes:
(1) For the meaning of room see definition in paragraph 1.1.
(2) The National classifications do not automatically equate with the equivalent classifications in the European column,
therefore products cannot typically assume a European class, unless they have been tested accordingly.
(3) Where a classification includes ‘s3,d2’, this means that there is no limit set for smoke production and flaming
droplets/particles.
Rooflights
3.14
Other than in a protected stairway a rooflight may be of a classification lower
than the relevant Class given in Table 3.1 provided that –
(a) where it is –
(i)
a plastic material which has a lower surface with a classification
not lower than Class 3; or
(ii) a thermoplastic material which has a lower surface with a
classification not lower than Class 3 or is classified as a TP(a)
rigid or TP(b) product,
the size of the rooflight does not exceed the relevant maximum area
given in Table 3.2; and
(b) where there is more than one rooflight in the ceiling of a room or
space –
(i)
the area of rooflights does not exceed the relevant maximum
total area given in Table 3.2; and
78
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

(ii) the disposition of the rooflights complies with the limitations
given in Diagram 3.1.
The upper surface of a rooflight is subject to the provisions of Section 5.
Windows and internal glazing
3.15
A window in the external wall of a circulation space and all internal glazed
areas should be glazed with a material having a classification not lower than
that given in Table 3.1.
A window in an external wall of a room may be glazed with a thermoplastic
material classified as a TP(a) rigid product.
Lighting diffusers
3.16
This paragraph applies to a lighting diffuser which forms part of a ceiling. It
does not apply to the diffuser of a light fitting which is attached to the soffit
of, or suspended beneath, a ceiling.
Table 3.2
Limitations on Class 3 plastic rooflights and thermoplastic rooflights and
lighting diffusers in suspended ceilings
Minimum
classification of
lower surface
Use of space
below rooflight or
diffuser
Maximum area of
each rooflight or
diffuser panel(1)
Maximum total area of
rooflights or diffuser panels
as a percentage of floor area
of the space in which the
ceiling is located
(%)
Minimum
separation distance
between rooflights
or diffuser panels(1)
(m2)
(m)
TP(a)
Rooms or circulation
spaces (except
protected stairways)
No limit(2)
No limit
No limit
Class 3(3) or
TP(b)
Rooms
5
50(4)(5)
3(5)
Circulation spaces
(except protected
stairways)
5
15(4)
3
Notes :
(1) Small rooflights or diffuser panels may be grouped together provided that the overall size of the group and the space
between one group and any others comply with the limitations given in Diagram 3.1.
(2) Lighting diffusers of a TP(a) flexible material are limited to panels of not more than 5 m2 (see paragraph 3.13).
(3) There are no limitations on Class 3 materials in certain small rooms (see Table 3.1).
(4) It may not be possible to use the maximum total percentage because the minimum 3 m separation distance must be
maintained (see Diagram 3.1).
(5) Class 3 rooflights to rooms in non-residential purpose groups may be spaced 1.8 m apart provided that the rooflights
are evenly distributed and do not exceed 20% of the area of the room.
79
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Lighting diffusers may be translucent or open-structured elements and may
be part of a light fitting or be used below a rooflight or other source of light.
A thermoplastic lighting diffuser should not be incorporated in a
fire-protecting or fire-resisting ceiling unless it has been satisfactorily tested
as part of a luminaire within a ceiling assembly that provides the appropriate
fire resistance. A ceiling in a room or in a circulation space (other than a
protected stairway) may incorporate a thermoplastic lighting diffuser
provided that –
(a) the wall and ceiling surfaces exposed within the space above the
ceiling (other than the upper surface of the lighting diffuser) comply
with the classification given in Table 3.1 for the space below the
ceiling; and
(b) the lighting diffuser is either –
(i)
classified as a TP(a) rigid product; or
(ii) classified as a TP(b) product and is loosely mounted so that it
will fall out of its mounting on initial heating. Where more than
one such lighting diffuser is fitted, they should be limited in their
extent in accordance with Table 3.2. Small lighting diffusers may
be grouped together (see Note (1) to Table 3.2 and
Diagram 3.1).
Diagram 3.1
Limitations on groups of Class 3 plastic rooflights and TP(b) thermoplastic
rooflights and lighting diffusers in suspended ceilings
see para 3.14(b), 3.16(b) and Table 3.2 note (1) and (4)
5 m max.
5 m max.
3 m min.
(between
groups of
panels)
5 m max.
5 m2 is the 
maximum area of
diffuser or 
rooflight in any 
one 5 m x 5 m
group
3 m min.
(between
groups of
panels)
Key
rooflight or
lighting
diffuser
separate group
of rooflights
or lighting
diffusers
80
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Section 4
Internal fire spread - Structure
4.1
The spread of fire within a building can be restricted by –
(a) ensuring the elements of structure and certain other components of
the building have a minimum standard of fire resistance;
(b) subdividing the building into compartments with fire-resisting
construction;
(c) subdividing concealed and extensive cavities within the construction;
and
(d) protecting openings in, and penetrations through, fire-resisting
construction.
Where a building is divided into separated parts by a compartment wall (or
walls), running the full height of the building in a continuous vertical plane,
the provisions of this Section may be applied separately to each separated
part.
Tests for fire resistance
4.2
The fire resistance of an element of structure or other component of a
building is a measure of its ability to withstand the effects of fire in one or
more of the following ways –
(a) resistance to collapse (loadbearing capacity) denoted ‘R’ in European
classification;
(b) resistance to fire penetration (integrity) denoted ‘E’ in European
classification; and
(c) resistance to transfer of excessive heat (insulation) denoted ‘I’ in
European classification.
National tests
4.3
Under National determination performance in respect of fire resistance
should be determined in accordance with, in the case of –
(a) loadbearing elements – BS 476: Parts 20 and 21;
(b) non-loadbearing elements – BS 476: Parts 20 and 22;
(c) suspended ceilings – BS 476: Parts 20 and 23;
(d) ventilation ducts – BS 476: Parts 20 and 24; and
(e) any element of construction tested prior to
1st January 1988 – BS 476: Part 8.
81
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

European tests
4.4
Under European determination performance in respect of fire resistance
should be classified in accordance with Commission Decision 2000/367/EC
of 3rd May 2000 implementing Council Directive 89/106/EEC as regards the
classification of the resistance to fire performance of construction products,
construction works and parts thereof. The fire resistance tests are –
(a) BS EN 1363-1 Fire Resistance tests – Part 1: General requirements;
(b) BS EN 1363-2 Fire Resistance tests – Part 2: Alternative and
additional procedures;
(c) BS EN 1364-1 Fire Resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements –
Part 1: Walls;
(d) BS EN 1364-2 Fire Resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements –
Part 2: Ceilings;
(e) BS EN 1365-1 Fire Resistance tests for loadbearing elements –
Part 1: Walls;
(f)
BS EN 1365-2 Fire Resistance tests for loadbearing elements –
Part 2: Floors and roofs;
(g) BS EN 1365-3 Fire Resistance tests for loadbearing elements –
Part 3: Beams;
(h) BS EN 1365-4 Fire Resistance tests for loadbearing elements –
Part 4: Columns;
(i)
BS EN 1366-1 Fire Resistance tests for service installations –
Part 1: Ducts;
(j)
BS EN 1366-2 Fire Resistance tests for service installations –
Part 2: Fire dampers;
(k) BS EN 1634-1 Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door,
shutter and openable window assemblies and elements of building
hardware – Part 1: Fire resistance tests for doors, shutters and
openable windows;
(l)
BS EN 1634-2 Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door,
shutter and openable window assemblies and elements of building
hardware – Fire resistance characterisation test for elements of
building hardware;
(m) BS EN 1634-3 Fire Resistance tests for door and shutter
assemblies – Part 3: Smoke control doors and shutters; and
(n) BS EN 81-58 Safety rules for the construction and installation of lifts –
Examination and tests – Part 58: Landing doors fire resistance test.
See Appendix C for full details of all publications referred to.
Specific provisions of test
4.5
Provision for an element of structure or other component of the building to
have a specific period of fire resistance means that it should have not less
than that period, in respect of the relevant aspects of performance given in
Table 4.1.
82
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 4.1
Specific provisions of test for fire resistance of elements of structure and other
components of a building
Minimum provisions when tested to the
relevant part of BS 476 (minutes)(11)
Minimum
provisions
when tested to
the relevant
European
standard
(minutes)(10)(11)
Part of building
Method of
exposure
Loadbearing
capacity(1)
Integrity
Insulation
1
Structural frame,
beam or column
See Table 4.2
Not applicable
Not applicable
R see Table 4.2
Exposed faces
2
Loadbearing wall
(which is not also a wall
described in any of the
following items)
See Table 4.2
Not applicable
Not applicable
R see Table 4.2
Each side
separately
3
Floors –
(a)
in upper storey
of two storey
dwellinghouse (but not
over a garage)
30(2)
15(2)
15(2)
REI 30(7)
From
underside
(b)
between a shop and
flat above
60 or see
Table 4.2
(whichever is
greater)
60 or see
Table 4.2
(whichever is
greater)
60 or see
Table 4.2
(whichever is
greater)
REI 60 or see
Table 4.2
(whichever is
greater)
(c)
any other floor
See Table 4.2
See Table 4.2
See Table 4.2
REI see
Table 4.2
4
Roofs –
(a)
any part forming an
escape route
30
30
30
REI 30
From
underside
See Table 4.2
See Table 4.2
See Table 4.2
REI see
Table 4.2
(b)
any roof that performs
the function of a floor
5
External walls –
(a)
any part less than 1 m
from any point on the
relevant boundary
See Table 4.2
See Table 4.2
See Table 4.2
REI see
Table 4.2
Each side
separately
(b)
any part 1 m or more
from the relevant
boundary
See Table 4.2
See Table 4.2
15
REI see
Table 4.2(8)
From inside
(c)
any part required to
have fire resistance to
protect an external
escape route
30
30
No
provision(3)
RE 30(3)
From inside
6
Compartment wall
separating occupancies
60 or see
Table 4.2
(whichever is
less)
60 or see
Table 4.2
(whichever is
less)
60 or see
Table 4.2
(whichever is
less)
REI 60 or see
Table 4.2
(whichever is
less)
Each side
separately
83
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 4.1
Specific provisions of test for fire resistance of elements of structure and other
components of a building (cont’d)
Minimum provisions when tested to the
relevant part of BS 476 (minutes)(11)
Minimum
provisions
when tested to
the relevant
European
standard
(minutes)(10)(11)
Part of building
Method of
exposure
Loadbearing
capacity(1)
Integrity
Insulation
7
Compartment wall
other than in item 6 above
See Table 4.2
See Table 4.2
See Table 4.2
REI see
Table 4.2
Each side
separately
8
Protected shafts,
excluding any
firefighting
shafts –
(a)
any glazing
described in
paragraph 4.26
Not applicable
30
No provision(3)
E 30(3)
(b)
any other part
between the
shaft and a
protected lobby
or protected
corridor
described in
paragraph 4.26
Each side
separately
30
30
30
REI 30
(c)
any part not
described in
(a) or (b)
above
See Table 4.2
See Table 4.2
See Table 4.2
REI see
Table 4.2
9
Enclosure (which
does not form
part of a
compartment wall
or a protected
shaft) to a –
(a)
protected
stairway
30
30
30(4)
REI 30(4)
Each side
separately
(b)
lift shaft
30
30
30
REI 30
(c)
service shaft
30
30
30
REI 30
84
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 4.1
Specific provisions of test for fire resistance of elements of structure and other
components of a building (cont’d)
Minimum provisions when tested to the
relevant part of BS 476 (minutes)(11)
Minimum
provisions
when tested to
the relevant
European
standard
(minutes)(10)(11)
Method of
exposure
Part of building
Loadbearing
capacity(1)
Integrity
Insulation
10
Firefighting
shafts –
(a)
construction
separating
firefighting
shafts from
remainder of
building
120
120
120
REI 120
From side
remote from
shaft
60
60
60
REI 60
From shaft side
(b)
construction
with a
firefighting
shaft
separating
firefighting
stairway, firefighting
lift shaft and
firefighting lobby
60
60
60
REI 60
Each side
separately
11
Enclosure (which
is not a
compartment wall or
described in item 8) to a –
Each side
separately
(a)
protected lobby or refuge
30
30
30(4)
REI 30(4)
(b)
protected corridor
30
30
30(4)
REI 30(4)
12
Subdivision of a
corridor
30
30
30(4)
REI 30(4)
Each side
separately
13
Wall separating an
attached or integral garage
from a dwellinghouse
30
30
30(4)
REI 30(4)
From garage
side
14
Fire-resisting construction –
(a)
in dwellings not
described elsewhere
30
30
30(4)
REI 30(4)
Each side
separately
(b)
enclosing places of
special fire hazard
30
30
30
REI 30
(c)
between retail areas in
a shop and store
rooms(5)
30
30
30
REI 30
(d)
fire-resisting
subdivision described
in Note (4) to Table 4.6
30
30
30
REI 30
85
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 4.1
Specific provisions of test for fire resistance of elements of structure and other
components of a building (cont’d)
Part of building
Minimum provisions when tested to the
relevant part of BS 476 (minutes)(11)
Minimum
provisions
when tested to
the relevant
European
standard
(minutes)(10)(11)
Method of
exposure
Loadbearing
capacity(1)
Integrity
Insulation
15
Cavity barrier
Not applicable
30
15
EI 30(9)
Each side
separately
16
Ceiling shown in
Diagram 4.6 or 4.7
Not applicable
30
30
EI 30
From
underside
17
Fire-resisting duct referred
to in paragraph 4.42(e)
Not applicable
30
No provision
E 30
From outside
18
Casing around a drainage
system as shown in
Diagram 4.11
Not applicable
30
No provision
E 30
From outside
19
Flue walls described
in paragraph 4.45
Not applicable
See Table
4.2(6)
See Table
4.2(6)
EI see
Table 4.2(6)
From outside
20
Fire doors
See Table 4.5
See Table 4.5
Notes:
(1)
Applies to loadbearing elements only.
(2)
This standard of fire resistance is referred to as modified 30 minutes.
(3)
Except for any limitations on glazed elements given in Table 2.8.
(4)
See Table 2.8 for permitted extent of uninsulated glazed elements.
(5)
Applies only to store rooms where their siting prejudices means of escape.
(6)
At least one half of the period of fire resistance required for the compartment wall or floor.
(7)
Floors under item 3a, may be considered to have met the minimum provision provided that they achieve at
least 30 minutes loadbearing capacity and at least 15 minutes integrity and insulation.
(8)
External walls under item 5b may be considered to have met the minimum provision provided that they achieve
the relevant provisions for loadbearing capacity and integrity given in Table 4.2 and at least 15 minutes insulation.
(9)
Cavity barriers under item 15 may be considered to have met the minimum provision provided that they achieve
at least 30 minutes integrity and at least 15 minutes insulation.
(10)
‘R’ is the European classification of the resistance to fire performance in respect of loadbearing capacity;
‘E’ is the European classification of the resistance to fire performance in respect of integrity; and
‘I’ is the European classification of the resistance to fire performance in respect of insulation.
(11)
The National classifications do not automatically equate with the equivalent classifications in the European
column, therefore products cannot typically assume a European class unless they have been tested accordingly.
86
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Fire resistance of elements of structure and certain other
components of the building
4.6
An element of structure and those other components of the building given in
Table 4.1 should have a minimum period of fire resistance of not less than
that given in Tables 4.1 and 4.2 for the purpose group of the building.
Where one element of structure or other component supports, carries or
gives stability to another, the fire resistance of the supporting element or
component should be not less than the minimum period of fire resistance for
the other element (whether that other element is loadbearing or not).
Where an element or structure or other component forms part of more than
one building or compartment, the fire resistance of that element or
component should be not less than the greater of the relevant provisions.
Fire protecting suspended ceilings
4.7
A suspended ceiling will only be accepted as contributing to the fire
resistance of a floor where that ceiling is of the appropriate type given in
Table 4.3.
Fire-resisting construction
4.8
Where an element of structure or other component of the building is
required to have fire resistance it may be constructed in accordance with an
appropriate specification in Part II of the Building Research Establishment
Report – Guidelines for the construction of fire-resisting structural elements
(BR 128: 1988).
Places of special fire hazard
4.9
Every place of special fire hazard should be enclosed by fire-resisting
construction [see Table 4.1, item 14(b)].
87
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 4.2
Minimum periods of fire resistance
Minimum period (minutes) for elements of structure and
other components of the building forming part of
Basement storey+
including floor
over
Ground or upper storey
Purpose group of building
Height (m) of top floor above
ground in building or separated
part of building(1)
Depth (m) of
basement
More
than 5
not
more
than 18
More
than 10
Not more
than 10
Not
more
than 5
More than
18 not
more than
30
More than
30
1
Residential (dwellings) –
(a)
flats
(b)
and (c)
dwellinghouses
90
Not
relevant
60
30*
30*
60(2)**
90**
120**
30*
60@
Not
relevant
Not
relevant
2
Residential –
30*##
120#
(a)
institutional
(b)
other residential
90
90
60
60
60
60
90
90
30*
120#
3
Office –
Not
permitted
120#
not sprinklered
sprinklered(3)
90
60
60
60
30*
60
30*
90
60
30*
4
Shop and commercial –
Not
permitted
120#
not sprinklered
sprinklered(3)
90
60
60
60
60
30*
60
60
90
60
5
Assembly and recreation –
Not
permitted
120#
not sprinklered
sprinklered(3)
90
60
60
60
60
30*
60
60
90
60
6
Industrial –
Not
permitted
120#
not sprinklered
sprinklered(3)
120
90
90
60
60
30*
90
60
120
90
7
Storage and other non-
residential –
(a)
any building or part not
described elsewhere –
Not
permitted
120#
not sprinklered
sprinklered(3)
120
90
90
60
60
30*
90
60
120
90
88
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 4.2
Minimum periods of fire resistance (cont’d)
Minimum period (minutes) for elements of structure and
other components of the building forming part of
Basement storey+
including floor
over
Ground or upper storey
Purpose group of building
Height (m) of top floor above
ground in building or separated
part of building(1)
Depth (m) of
basement
More
than 10
Not more
than 10
Not
more
than 5
More
than 5
not more
than 18
More
than 18
not more
than 30
More than
30
7
(b)
car park for light
vehicles –
(i)
open sided car
park(4)
Not
applicable
Not
applicable
15*$(5)
15*$(5)
15*$(5)
Not
applicable
(ii)
any other car park
90
60
30*
60
90
120#
Notes:
+
The floor over a basement (or if there is more than one basement, the floor over the topmost basement) should meet
the provisions for the ground and upper storeys if that period is higher.
*
Increased to a minimum of 60 minutes for compartment walls separating buildings.
** Reduced to 30 minutes for any floor within a flat with more than one storey, but not if the floor contributes to the
support of the building as a whole.
@ Reduced to 30 minutes for a dwellinghouse having not more than three storeys and for the wall or floor separating a
dwellinghouse from an attached or integral garage.
## Multi-storey hospitals designed in accordance with Northern Ireland Firecode documents should have a minimum of
60 minutes.
$
Increased to a minimum of 30 minutes for elements protecting the means of escape.
#
Reduced to 90 minutes for elements not forming part of the structural frame.
(1) A single storey building or a single storey separated part of a building should be subject to the period given under the
heading “Not more than 5” and where it has a basement storey or storeys they should be subject to the period
appropriate to their depth.
(2) Reduced to 30 minutes where an existing building of not more than three storeys is being converted.
(3) “Sprinklered” means that the building is fitted throughout with an automatic sprinkler system complying with the
relevant requirements of BS 5306-2 or BS EN 12845 in respect of occupancy rating and additional requirements for
life safety.
(4) Car parks which comply with paragraphs 4.49 and 4.50.
(5) For the purposes of this technical booklet the following types of steel elements are deemed to have satisfied the
minimum period of fire resistance of 15 minutes when tested to the European test method –
(i)
Beams supporting concrete floors, maximum Am/V = 230 m-1 operating under full design load.
(ii) Free standing columns, maximum Am/V = 180 m-1 operating under full design load.
(iii) Wind bracing and struts, maximum Am/V = 210 m-1 operating under full design load.
The meaning of ‘Am/V’ is given in BS 5950-8 Structural use of steel work in building - Code of practice for fire
resistant design and is in line with European terminology. (This section factor was previously known as Hp/A.)
89
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 4.3
Limitations of fire-protecting suspended ceilings
Type of
suspended
ceiling
(see notes)
Height of building
or separated part
(m)
Type of floor
Fire resistance of floor
required by Table 4.2
(minutes)
Not compartment
60 or less
Less than 18
W, X, Y or Z
Less than 60
Compartment
60
X, Y or Z
18 or more
Any
60 or less
Y or Z
No limit
Any
More than 60
Z
Notes:
Ceiling type
Description
W
Surface of ceiling exposed to the cavity should be Class 0 or Class 1 (National Class) or
Class C-s3,d2 or higher (European Class).
X
Surface of ceiling exposed to the cavity should be Class 0 (National Class) or Class B-s3,d2
or higher (European Class).
Y
Surface of ceiling exposed to the cavity should be Class 0 (National Class) or Class B-s3,d2
or higher (European Class). Ceiling should not contain easily openable access panels.
Z
Ceiling should be of a material of limited combustibility and not contain easily openable
access panels. Any insulation above the ceiling should be of a material of limited combustibility.
Any access panels provided in fire-protecting suspended ceilings of Type Y or Z should be secured in position by
releasing devices or screw fixings, and they should be shown to have been tested in the ceiling assembly in which
they are incorporated.
European classifications
The National classifications do not automatically equate with the equivalent European classifications, therefore
products cannot typically assume a European class unless they have been tested accordingly.
Where a classification includes ‘s3,d2’ this means that there is no limit set for smoke production and/or flaming
droplets/particles.
Diagram 4.1
Doorway between dwellinghouse and garage
see para 4.10
dwellinghouse
fire-resisting
self-closing
door
fire-resisting
floor (if any)
fire-resisting
wall
100 mm threshold
to prevent leakage
of flammable liquid into
the dwellinghouse
garage
90
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Dwellinghouses with attached garages
4.10
Where a dwellinghouse has an attached or integral garage it should be
separated from the garage by fire-resisting construction with no openings
other than for a fire-resisting self-closing door. In the case of a doorway
between the dwellinghouse and the garage the doorway should have a
threshold height of not less than 100 mm above the garage floor level to
prevent the leakage of flammable liquid into the dwellinghouse
(see Diagram 4.1).
Variations of the provisions regarding fire resistance
4.11
A provision for an element of structure to have fire resistance should not
apply to –
(a) any part of the structure which only supports a roof unless –
(i)
the roof performs the function of a floor, e.g. as a means of
escape, for parking of vehicles, etc.;
(ii) the structure is part of, or is essential for the stability of an
external wall which, under the provisions of Section 4, cannot
be an unprotected area; or
(iii) the structure is part of or supports a compartment wall or a wall
between a dwellinghouse and an attached or integral garage;
(b) in the case of a single storey building or a building which consists of a
ground storey and one or more basement storeys – any element of
structure which forms part of the ground storey unless the element –
(i)
supports a gallery; or
(ii) is located as defined in sub-paragraph 4.11 (a)(ii) or 4.11 (a)(iii);
(c) the lowest floor of a building; and
(d) a platform floor.
4.12
Where one side of a basement storey or compartment is (due to the slope of
the ground) open at and provides – means of escape and fire and rescue
access at ground level and smoke venting, the period of resistance for the
elements of structure and other components of the building in that basement
storey or compartment should be that appropriate to a storey above the
ground.
4.13
Where the roof space of an existing two storey dwellinghouse is to be
converted to form a new storey the provisions of this Section are for the
floors, both old and new, to have full 30 minutes fire resistance. However,
the existing first floor construction need not be upgraded where it separates
only rooms (and not circulation spaces) provided that –
(a) only one storey is being added;
(b) the new storey contains not more than two habitable rooms;
(c) the total area of the new storey is not more than 50 m2;
(d) it has at least modified 30 minutes fire resistance; and
(e) the provisions of paragraphs 2.17 to 2.22 are met.
91
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Raised storage floors
4.14
Raised free-standing floors supported by racking are frequently erected for
storage purposes and whether they are considered as a gallery or as a floor
forming a storey the provisions for fire resistance for elements of structure
apply.
In the case of automated storage systems where people do not normally
frequent any of the raised storage tiers it is not necessary to provide the
storage structure with fire resistance.
Where people frequent the storage tiers in the course of their normal use,
the provisions for fire resistance for the raised storage floor and its
supporting structure may be dispensed with where the number of persons
likely to be on the raised floor at any one time is low (and does not include
members of the public) and the raised floor –
(a) is within a single storey building or compartment and is structurally
free-standing;
(b) consists of only one tier with the space both above and below used
only for storage purposes;
(c) is not more than 20 m in both width and length and does not exceed
one half of the floor area of the space in which it is situated. However,
these limits should not apply where the building is fitted throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system complying with the relevant
recommendations of BS 5306-2 or BS EN 12845 in respect of
occupancy rating and additional requirements for life safety;
(d) is served by a stair or stairs to comply with the relevant maximum
travel distance given in Table 2.3 and at least one stair discharges
within 4.5 m of an exit from the building or compartment;
(e) has a surface classification on the underside not lower than Class 3
(National class) or Class D-s3,d2 (European class) (see paragraphs
3.4 and 3.7); and
(f)
is designed and constructed so that any persons on the floor will be
readily aware of a fire starting on the lower level. Design and
construction features include the use of perforations in the floor,
leaving a space between the floor and the walls of the space housing
it and automatic fire detection and alarm systems. However, where
either the length or width of a raised storage floor is greater than 10 m
an automatic fire detection and fire alarm system to BS 5839-1 of at
least Category L5 standard with a smoke detector or detectors located
to give warning of a fire below the floor should be provided.
92
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Compartmentation
4.15
The degree to which a building or separated part of a building is subdivided
into compartments is related to the use of and the fire load in the building,
the height to the top storey and the provision or otherwise of a sprinkler
system. Compartmentation may assist in meeting the provisions of
Section 2 or Section 5 of this Technical Booklet.
For compartmentation to be effective there should be continuity at the
junctions of the fire-resisting elements enclosing the compartment and any
opening from one compartment to another should not present a weakness.
The spaces which connect compartments, e.g. stairs, service shafts, etc.,
should be enclosed to form protected shafts and their walls and floors
should be constructed as compartment walls and compartment floors.
4.16
In the case of a two storey building of Purpose Group 4 or 6, where the use
of the upper storey is ancillary to the main use of the ground storey, the
ground storey may be treated as a single storey building for
compartmentation purposes provided that –
(a) the floor area of the upper storey is not more than –
(i)
one fifth of the floor area of the ground storey; or
(ii) 500 m2,
whichever is the lesser; and
(b) the upper storey is a separate compartment.
Provision of compartment walls and compartment floors
4.17
In buildings of all purpose groups –
(a) a compartment wall should be constructed where a wall –
(i)
is common to two or more buildings; or
(ii) is provided to divide a building into separated parts; and
(b) a compartment wall or a compartment floor, as appropriate should be
constructed to separate parts of a building which are in different
purpose groups of Appendix A.
4.18
The following walls or floors should be constructed as compartment walls or
compartment floors –
(a) in a building of Purpose Group 1(b) or (c) –
(i)
a wall which separates semi-detached dwellinghouses or
dwellinghouses in a terrace (in these cases each dwellinghouse
should be treated as a separate building); and
(ii) a wall or floor which separates a dwellinghouse from an
attached or integral garage;
(b) in a building of Purpose Group 1(a) –
(i)
every floor, other than a floor within a flat with more than one
storey;
(ii) every wall which separates a flat from any other part of the
building; and
(iii) every wall enclosing a communal waste container;
93
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

(c) in a building of Purpose Group 2 –
(i)
every floor; and
(ii) in the case of a health care building – a wall needed to divide a
storey into compartments for means of escape purposes;
(d) in a building of Purpose Group 4, 6 or 7 a wall or floor provided to
divide the building into different occupancies (i.e. ownership, tenancies
or similar); and
(e) in a building of Purpose Group 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7 –
(i)
a wall which is needed to subdivide a building, or separated part
of a building, so that the maximum floor area or maximum
volume, as appropriate, of a compartment given in Table 4.4 is
not exceeded;
(ii) every floor in a building or a separated part of a building (other
than the lowest floor) where that building or separated part has
a floor at a height of more than 30 m above ground level;
(iii) the floor of the ground storey where a building or separated part
of a building has one or more basements (with the exception of
a small building described in paragraph 2.68); and
(iv) every basement floor in a building, or a separated part of a
building (other than the lowest basement floor), where that
building or separated part has a floor at a depth of more than
10 m below ground level.
Construction of compartment walls and compartment floors
4.19
Every compartment wall and compartment floor should –
(a) form a complete barrier to fire between the compartments they
separate; and
(b) have the appropriate fire resistance required by paragraph 4.6.
A compartment wall may have timber beams, joists, purlins and rafters built
into it provided that –
(i)
the wall is of masonry or concrete construction;
(ii) any gaps between the wall and the timber are as small as practicable;
and
(iii) any gaps are fire-stopped in accordance with paragraphs 4.46 and
4.47.
A compartment wall between two or more buildings should extend the full
height of the buildings in a continuous vertical plane. Thus adjoining
buildings should be separated only by walls and not by floors.
A compartment wall used to form a separated part of a building should
extend the full height of the building in a continuous vertical plane. Thus
separated parts should be separated only by walls and not by floors.
94
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 4.4
Maximum floor areas and volumes of buildings or compartments
Height of top storey
of building above
ground level (m)
Floor area of any one
storey in the building
or compartment (m2)
Maximum
compartment
volume (m3)
Purpose group of building
(or part)
In a multi-
In a single
storey
storey
building
building
In a multi-
In a single
storey
storey
building
building
3
Office
No limit
No limit
No limit
No limit
No limit
4
Shop and commercial –
(i) shop –
not sprinklered
No limit
2000
2000
No limit
No limit
sprinklered(1)
No limit
4000
No limit
No limit
No limit
(ii) other than shop –
not sprinklered
No limit
2000
No limit
No limit
No limit
sprinklered
No limit
4000
No limit
No limit
No limit
5
Assembly and recreation –
(i) school
not sprinklered
No limit
800
800
No limit
No limit
sprinklered(1)
No limit
2000
No limit
No limit
No limit
(ii) other than school –
not sprinklered
No limit
2000
No limit
No limit
No limit
sprinklered(1)
No limit
4000
No limit
No limit
No limit
6(3) Industrial –
not sprinklered
Not more than 18
More than 18
7000
No limit
2000(2)
No limit
No limit
No limit
No limit
No limit
sprinklered(1)
Not more than 18
More than 18
14000
No limit
4000(2)
No limit
No limit
No limit
No limit
No limit
7
Storage and other
non-residential –
(a)(3)storage and any use
not described elsewhere –
not sprinklered
Not more than 18
More than 18
No limit
No limit
No limit
No limit
20000
No limit
4000(2)
No limit
sprinklered(1)
Not more than 18
More than 18
No limit
No limit
No limit
No limit
40000
No limit
8000(2)
No limit
(b)
car park for light vehicles
No limit
No limit
No limit
No limit
No limit
Notes:
(1) ‘Sprinklered’ means that the building is fitted throughout with an automatic sprinkler system meeting the relevant
recommendations of BS 5306-2 or BS EN 12845, i.e. the relevant occupancy rating together with the additional
requirements for life safety.
(2) This reduced limit applies only to those storeys which are more than 18 m above ground level.
(3) There may be additional limitations on floor area, volume and/or sprinkler provisions in certain industrial and storage
uses under other legislation.
95
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Junctions of compartment walls and compartment floors with other
walls
4.20
Where a compartment wall or compartment floor meets a compartment wall
or an external wall the junction should maintain the fire resistance for a
period of not less than the period of fire resistance required by the
compartment wall or compartment floor.
Junction of compartment walls and roofs
4.21
If a fire penetrates a roof near a compartment wall there is a risk that it will
spread over the roof to the adjoining compartment. Where a compartment
wall meets a roof it should –
(a) where the roof covering has a designation of AA, AB or AC (see
paragraph 5.21), on a substrate or deck of a material of limited
combustibility, for a width of not less than 1.5 m on either side of the
junction – be taken up to meet the underside of the roof covering or
deck and the junction fire-stopped [see Diagram 4.2(a)]. Where double
skinned insulated roof sheeting is used it should incorporate a
firebreak formed by a band of material of limited combustibility not less
than 300 mm wide centred over the wall.
Note – Thermoplastic rooflights which by virtue of paragraph 5.25 are
regarded as having an AA (National class) designation or BROOF(t4)
(European class) are not suitable for use in the zone described above.
However, where the building is of Purpose Group 1, 2(b), 3 or 5 and is
not more than 15 m in height a combustible substrate of timber
boarding, wood wool slabs or timber tiling battens may be carried over
the compartment wall provided it is fully bedded in mortar, or no less
suitable material, over the entire width of the wall
[see Diagram 4.2(b)]; or
(b) be extended up through the roof to a height of not less than 375 mm
above the top surface of the roof covering [see Diagram 4.2(c)].
In paragraph (a) where roof support members pass through the wall they
should be fire protected for a length of not less than 1.5 m on either side of
the wall in order to avoid distortion at the junction.
Openings in compartment walls which separate buildings or
occupancies
4.22
A compartment wall which is common to two or more buildings, or which
separates different occupancies in the same building, should have no
openings other than those for –
(a) means of escape in case of fire – when a fire-resisting self-closing
door (see paragraphs 4.29 to 4.35) having the same period of fire
resistance as that of the compartment wall should be provided; and
(b) the passage of a pipe – when the opening in the wall should comply
with paragraphs 4.43 and 4.45 to 4.47.
96
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 4.2
Junction of compartment wall and roof
see para 4.21 (a) and (b)
AA, AB or AC roof covering
1.5 m
1.5 m
fire 
stopping
substrate/deck
a material of
limited combustibility
(a)  Any building
AA, AB or AC roof covering
1.5 m 
1.5 m
mortar
bedding
slates/tiles
timber battens
sarking felt
(b)  Building of Purpose Group
 
1, 2(b), 3 or 5 not more than
 
15 m in height
not less 
than 375 mm
not less 
than 375 mm
roof
covering
(c)  Any building
97
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Openings in other compartment walls and in compartment floors
4.23
A compartment wall (other than one described in paragraph 4.22) and a
compartment floor should have no openings other than those –
(a) having a fire-resisting self-closing door (see paragraph 4.29 to 4.35);
(b) for the passage of pipes, ventilation ducts, chimneys, appliance
ventilation duct or duct encasing one or more flue pipes – when the
opening in the compartment wall or compartment floor should comply
with paragraphs 4.43 to 4.47;
(c) for a waste chute system constructed of non-combustible materials;
(d) for an atrium designed in accordance with BS 5588-7; and
(e) for a protected shaft which complies with the provisions of paragraph
4.25 to 4.28.
4.24
The combined width of openings for fire doors in a compartment wall should
be not more than 25% of the length of the compartment wall.
Protected shafts between compartments
4.25
A protected shaft should only be used to accommodate stairs, lifts,
escalators, chutes, ducts, pipes, sanitary accommodation and washrooms.
Where a protected shaft contains a protected stairway, Section 2 imposes
additional requirements (see paragraphs 2.69 to 2.73) and where it contains
a firefighting stairway Section 6 imposes additional requirements (see
paragraphs 6.3 to 6.6).
The construction enclosing a protected shaft, other than a wall which is part
of an external wall, should –
(a) form a complete barrier to fire between the different compartments
which the shaft connects;
(b) have the same fire resistance as the compartment through which it is
passing, other than where a glazed screen complying with paragraph
4.26 is provided; and
(c) satisfy the provisions regarding ventilation in paragraph 4.27 and
regarding the treatment of openings in paragraph 4.28.
Glazed screens in protected shafts
4.26
Glazing may be incorporated in the wall between a protected shaft
containing a stairway, and a corridor or lobby which gives access to that
stairway provided that –
(a) the protected shaft is not a firefighting shaft;
(b) the protected shaft is not required to have more than 60 minutes fire
resistance; and
(c) the glazing has not less than 30 minutes fire resistance in respect of
integrity; and either –
(i)
the glazing is limited in extent in accordance with Table 2.8; or
(ii) the corridor or lobby has not less than 30 minutes fire
resistance (see Diagram 4.3).
98
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 4.3
Glazed screen separating protected shaft from corridor or lobby
see para 4.26(c)
Key
fire resistance provision
for protecting structure
of not more than 60
minutes
protected
shaft
...............................
protected
shaft
corridor
.........
lobby
fire resistance of 
construction to be at least
30 minutes (including doors)
glazed 
screen
glazed 
screen
........
fire resistance of glazing
to be at least 30 minutes
(including doors)
(a) With corridor
(b) With lobby
Pipes for oil or gas and ventilation ducts in protected shafts
4.27
Where a protected shaft contains –
(a) a stairway and/or a lift it should not contain –
(i)
a pipe conveying oil, other than in the mechanism of a hydraulic
lift; or
(ii) a ventilation duct, other than a duct provided for the purposes of
pressurizing the shaft to keep it free from smoke in the event of
fire or a duct provided solely for ventilating the stairway; and
(b) a pipe conveying flammable gas it should be adequately ventilated
directly to external air by ventilation openings at both high and low
levels in the shaft. Any pipe conveying natural gas or LPG should be
of screwed steel or of all welded steel construction.
Openings in protected shafts
4.28
(a)
Where the wall of a protected shaft is common to two or more
buildings no opening should be provided in that wall other than for –
(i)
means of escape in case of fire – when a fire-resisting
self-closing door, having the same period of fire resistance as
the protected shaft, should be provided; and
(ii) the passage of a pipe – when the opening should comply with
paragraphs 4.43 and 4.45 to 4.47.
99
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

(b)
Other than in walls subject to sub-paragraph (a) and external walls, a
protected shaft should only have openings for –
(i)
a fire-resisting self-closing door which complies with
paragraph 4.29;
(ii) the passage of a pipe where the opening complies with
paragraphs 4.43 and 4.45 to 4.47;
(iii) where the shaft is or contains a ventilation duct – the inlets to,
outlets from and opening for a ventilation duct which complies
with paragraph 4.44;
(iv) where the shaft is pressurized for the purposes of paragraph
2.64 – the inlet from and opening for the ductwork; and
(v) where the shaft contains a lift – the passage of lift cables into a
lift motor room. Where the motor room is at the bottom of the
shaft the opening should be as small as practicable.
Fire doors
4.29
A fire door should have the performance appropriate to the location given in
Table 4.5 and should be fitted with an automatic self-closing device (other
than those fire doors to cupboards and ducts, which are to be kept locked
shut when not in use).
4.30
(a) Under National determination fire doors are classified by their
performance under test to BS 476: Part 22 in respect of integrity expressed
in minutes. A suffix (S) is added for doors where smoke leakage at ambient
temperatures is to be restricted.
(b) Under European determination fire doors are classified by their
performance with reference to Commission Decision 2000/367/EC of 3rd
May 2000 implementing Council Directive 89/106/EEC as regards the
classification of the resistance to fire performance of construction products,
construction works and parts thereof. All fire doors should be classified in
accordance with BS EN 13501-2 Fire classification of construction products
and building elements – Part 2: Classification using data from fire resistance
tests, excluding ventilation services. Performance in respect of integrity (E)
is expressed in minutes. An additional classification of ‘Sa’ is used where
smoke leakage at ambient temperatures is to be restricted. The fire
resistance tests are –
(i)
BS EN 1634-1 Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door,
shutter and openable window assemblies and elements of building
hardware – Part 1: Fire resistance tests for doors, shutters and
openable windows;
(ii) BS EN 1634-2 Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door,
shutter and openable window assemblies and elements of building
hardware – Part 2: Fire resistance characterisation test for elements of
building hardware;
(iii) BS EN 1634-3 Fire Resistance tests for door and shutter assemblies –
Part 3: Smoke control doors and shutters; and
(iv) BS EN 81-58 Safety rules for the construction and installation of lifts –
Examination and tests – Part 58: Landing doors fire resistance test,
which may be used for lift landing doors in accordance with European
Parliament Council Directive 95/16/EC of 29/06/1995 implementing
the Lifts Regulations 1997.
100
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 4.5
Performance of fire doors
Location of door
Minimum fire resistance of door in
terms of integrity (minutes) when
tested to BS 476: Part 22(1)(3)
Minimum fire resistance of door
terms of integrity (minutes)
when tested to the relevant
European standard(3)
1
In a compartment wall separating
buildings
As for the wall in which the door is
fitted, but a minimum of 60
As for the wall in which the door is
fitted, but a minimum of 60
2
In a compartment wall not described
in item 1 above –
(a)
where it separates a flat
from a space in
common use
(b)
where it forms part of a
protected shaft forming a
stairway situated wholly or partly
above the adjoining ground in a
building of
Purpose Group 1(a), 2, 3 or 5
(c)
enclosing a protected shaft
forming a stairway not described
in (b) above
30S(2)
E30Sa
30S(2)
E30Sa
Half the period of fire resistance of
the wall in which it is fitted but 30
minimum and with suffix S
Half the period of fire resistance of
the wall in which it is fitted but 30
minimum and with suffix Sa
(d)
enclosing a protected shaft
forming a lift or service shaft
Half the period of fire resistance of
the wall in which it is fitted but 30
minimum
As for the wall it is fitted in, but with
suffix S if the door is used for
progressive horizontal evacuation
Half the period of fire resistance of
the wall in which it is fitted but 30
minimum
As for the wall it is fitted in, but with
suffix Sa if the door is used for
progressive horizontal evacuation
(e)
not described in (a), (b), (c)
or (d) above
3
In a compartment floor
As for the floor in which it is fitted
As for the floor in which it is fitted
4
In the wall of a protected shaft, not
described in items 2(b), (c)
or (d) above, which is –
(a)
a protected stairway (other than
one described in item 9 below)
(b)
a lift shaft or a service shaft
(c)
any other shaft
30S(2)
E30Sa
30
30S(2)
E30
E30Sa
5
In the enclosure of –
(a)
a protected lobby or protected
corridor to a stairway
(b)
a protected lobby approach to a
lift shaft [see paragraph 2.66(b)]
(c)
any other protected corridor
(d)
a place of special fire hazard
30S(2)
E30Sa
30S(2)
E30Sa
20S(2)
E20Sa
E30Sa
30S(2)
6
In an external wall and giving access
to an external escape route
30
E30
7
Subdividing –
(a)
corridors connecting alternative
storey exits
(b)
dead-end portions of corridors
from the remainder of the
corridor
20S(2)
E20Sa
20S(2)
E20Sa
101
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 4.5
Performance of fire doors (cont’d)
Location of door
Minimum fire resistance of door in
terms of integrity (minutes) when
tested to BS 476: Part 22(1)(3)
Minimum fire resistance of door
in terms of integrity (minutes)
when tested to the relevant
European standard(3)
8
Any door –
(a)
within a cavity barrier
(b)
between a dwellinghouse and a
garage
(c)
in the enclosure to a communal
area in sheltered housing
30
30
E30
E30
30S(2)
E30Sa
9
Any door –
(a)
forming part of the enclosures to
a protected stair in a single
family dwellinghouse
(b)
within any other fire-resisting
construction in a dwelling
20
E20
20
E20
Notes:
(1) To BS 476: Part 22 (or BS 476: Part 8 subject to paragraph 4.5).
(2) Unless pressurization techniques complying with BS EN 12101-6 are used, these doors should also –
(a) have a leakage rate not exceeding 3 m3/m/hour (head and jambs only) when tested at 25 Pa under
BS 476: Section 31.1; or
(b) meet the additional classification requirements of ‘Sa’ when tested to BS EN 1634-3, Fire resistance
tests for door and shutter assemblies, Part 3 – Smoke control doors and shutters.
(3) The National classifications do not automatically equate with the equivalent classifications in the European
column, therefore products cannot typically assume a European class unless they have been tested accordingly.
4.31
The method of test exposure is from each side of the door separately,
except in the case of lift doors, which are tested from the landing side only.
Any test evidence used to substantiate the fire resistance rating of a door or
shutter should be carefully checked to ensure that it adequately
demonstrates compliance and is applicable to the complete installed
assembly. Small differences in detail (such as glazing aperatures,
intumescent strips, door frames and ironmongery etc.) may significantly
affect the rating.
4.32
A fire door should only be held open by –
(a) a fusible link, provided that the provisions of paragraph 4.34 are
complied with where the door opening is provided for means of
escape;
(b) an automatic release mechanism complying with BS 5839-3 provided
that –
(i)
the release mechanism is activated by an automatic fire
detection and fire alarm system to BS 5839-1 of at least
Category L5 standard with a smoke detector located on either
side of the door;
(ii) the door can be closed manually; and
(iii) the door does not give access to a firefighting stairway; or
102
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

(c) a door co-ordinator device which co-ordinates the closing sequence of
rebated double leaf swing doors.
4.33
Unless shown to be satisfactory when tested as part of a fire door assembly,
the hinges on which a fire door is hung should be made from material
having a melting point of at least 800ºC.
4.34
Where an opening is provided for, or opens onto, a means of escape and it
is intended that the door should be held open by a fusible link, a second
door having 30 minutes fire resistance should be provided. This second door
should be capable of closing the opening and be easily opened by hand.
Where two fire doors are fitted in the same opening and each door is
capable of closing that opening, the total fire resistance may be taken as the
sum of their individual fire resistance.
4.35
All fire doors, other than those listed below, should be marked with an
appropriate fire safety sign complying with BS 5499: Part 1 indicating
whether the door is –
(a) to be kept closed when not in use;
(b) to be kept locked shut when not in use; or
(c) held open by an automatic release mechanism.
Signs should be provided on both sides of the door except for doors to
cupboards and service ducts which should be marked on the outside only.
The following fire doors do not require to be marked –
(i)
doors within dwellinghouses;
(ii) doors to and within flats;
(iii) bedroom doors in Purpose Group 2 buildings; and
(iv) lift doors.
103
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Provision of cavity barriers
4.36
To restrict the spread of smoke and flame through concealed spaces in the
construction of a building, cavity barriers should be provided –
(a) in a building of any purpose group –
(i)
at the intersection of fire-resisting construction and an element
containing a cavity as shown in Diagram 4.4; and
(ii) as set out in Table 4.6 for the appropriate purpose group of the
building and the specified locations.
[Note – alternative arrangements for items 1, 3 and 4 are shown
in Diagram 4.5 and for item 2 in Diagram 4.6. Notes (3) and (4)
to Table 4.6 are supported by Diagrams 4.7 and 4.8
respectively]; and
(b) in a building of Purpose Group 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or 7 – so that the maximum
dimension of a cavity, (other than one described in paragraph 4.40 or
4.41) should be not greater than that given in Table 4.7 for the
appropriate location of the cavity.
4.37
A cavity barrier should not be used above a compartment wall to complete
the line of compartmentation, i.e. a compartment wall should be carried up
to a compartment floor or to a roof.
Table 4.6
Provision of cavity barriers
Purpose group to which
the provision applies
Item
Cavity barriers to be provided
1a
1b & c
2
3, 4, 5,
6 and 7
1
At the top of an external cavity wall and at the junction
between an external cavity wall and a compartment wall
that separates buildings, except where the external cavity
complies with Diagram 4.5




2
Above(1) the enclosures to a protected stairway in a
dwellinghouse of three or more storeys
(see Diagram 4.6)(3)
N/A

N/A
N/A

N/A


3
At the junction between an external cavity wall and every
compartment floor and compartment wall, except where
the external cavity wall complies with Diagram 4.5
4
At the junction between a cavity wall and every
compartment floor, compartment wall, or other wall or door
assembly which forms a fire-resisting barrier, except
where the external cavity wall complies with Diagram 4.5

N/A


5
In a protected escape route, above(1) and below any fire-
resisting construction which is not carried full storey
height(2) or (in the case of a top storey) to the underside of
the roof covering(3)

N/A


104
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 4.6
Provision of cavity barriers (cont’d)
Purpose group to which
the provision applies
Item
Cavity barriers to be provided
3, 4, 5,
6 and 7
1a
1b & c
2
6
Above(1) any bedroom partitions which are not carried full
storey height(2), or (in the case of a top storey) to the
underside of the roof covering(3)
N/A
N/A

N/A
N/A
N/A


7
Above(1) any corridor enclosures which are not carried full
storey height(2), or (in the case of a top storey) to the
underside of the roof covering, where the corridor (which
is not a protected corridor) is subdivided to prevent fire or
smoke affecting two alternative escape routes
simultaneously (see Section 2)(4)
8
To subdivide any cavity (including any roof space) so that
the distance between cavity barriers does not exceed the
dimensions given in Table 4.7
N/A
N/A


9
Within the void behind the external face of rain
screencladding at every floor level, and on the line of
compartment walls abutting the external wall, of buildings
which have a floor more than 18 m above ground level

N/A

N/A
10
At the edges of cavities (including around openings)(5)




Notes:

Provision applies.
N/A
Not applicable.
(1)
Above and in the same plane as the element.
(2)
Full storey height means from structural floor slab to the underside of the structural floor above.
(3)
The cavity barriers in items 2, 5 and 6 are not required where the cavity is enclosed on the lower side by
a fire-resisting ceiling (as shown in Diagram 4.7) which extends throughout the building, compartment or
separated part.
(4)
The cavity barrier in item 7 is not required where the storey is subdivided by fire-resisting construction carried full
storey height(2) and passing through the line of subdivision of the corridor (see Diagram 4.8), or where the cavity
is enclosed on the lower side as described in Note (3) above.
(5)
Cavity barriers provided around window or door openings may be formed by window or door frames (see
paragraph 4.38).
105
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 4.4
Cavity barriers at intersections
see para 4.36(a)
floor
wall with cavity
compartment
floor
cavity
barrier
cavity
barrier
alternatively carry wall
up to underside of floor
suspended ceiling
fire-resisting wall (but
not a compartment wall)
(a) Section
(b) Section
wall with cavity
fire-resisting door
cavity
barrier
cavity
barrier
fire-resisting wall 
(but not a wall required
to be fire-resisting solely
because it is a
loadbearing wall)
fire-resisting wall 
(but not a wall required
to be fire-resisting solely
because it is a
loadbearing wall)
wall with cavity
(d) Plan
(c) Plan
106
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 4.5
Cavity walls excluded from certain provisions for cavity barriers
see para 4.35(a), 4.39(a) and Table 4.6 Items 1, & 4
Notes:
Combustible material should not be placed in
or exposed to the cavity except for –
(a)
timber lintels, window or door frames, or the
ends of timber joists;
(b)
pipe, conduit or cable;
(c)
d.p.c., flashing, cavity closer or wall tie;
(d)
thermal insulating material; or
cavity barrier at top of wall 
(unless cavity is totally
filled with insulation)
(e)
a domestic meter cupboard provided that –
there are no more than two cupboards per
dwelling;
the opening in the outer wall leaf is not
more than 800 mm x 500 mm for each
cupboard; and
the inner leaf is not penetrated except by
a sleeve not more than 80 mm x 80 mm, which          
is fire-stopped.
cavity barrier around 
openings
see Item 10 Table 4.6
opening
Section
external cavity wall of two leaves of
brick, block or concrete each at least
75 mm thick – cavity width 300 mm maximum
Diagram 4.6
Alternative arrangement of cavity barriers in roof space over a
protected stairway in a dwellinghouse of three or more storeys
see para 4.36(a) and Table 4.6 item 2
cavity barrier(s)
in roof space
fire-resisting      
ceiling (see
Diagram 4.7)
roof space
roof space
protected
stairway
protected
stairway
fire-resisting
enclosure
to stairway
fire-resisting
enclosure
to stairway
(a) With cavity barrier(s) as
required by Table 4.6
(b) Alternative arrangement with
fire-resisting ceiling
107
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 4.7
Fire-resisting ceiling below a cavity
see para 4.36(a), 4.40(b), Table 4.6 note(3) and Diag. 4.6
Note:
The ceiling should –
floor or roof
construction
(a) have at least 30 minutes fire
 
resistance;
(b) be imperforate except for an
 
opening described in
 
paragraph 4.42;
cavity
upper ceiling surface – Class 1 (National class) or 
Class C-s3,d2 (European class)
(c) extend throughout the building
 
or compartment; and
lower ceiling surface – Class 0 (National class) or 
Class B-s3,d2 or higher (European class)
ceiling
(d) not be easily demountable.
Diagram 4.8
Alternative arrangements for corridor enclosure
see para 4.36(a) and Table 4.6 note(4)
floor
cavity barrier
ceiling void (cavity)
floor
suspended ceiling
accommodation
corridor
ceiling void (cavity)
cavity barrier
floor
suspended ceiling
corridor
accommodation
(a) Section showing use of cavity barriers above the corridor
 
enclosure as required by Table 4.6
the subdivision is carried
full storey height and
includes subdivision of the 
corridor.
a cavity barrier is used in 
the corridor ceiling void, over
the corridor subdivision.
accommodation
stair
stair
F.D.
cavity barrier above
corridor on line of 
subdivision
Key
F.D.
fire-resisting door
(b) Alternative arrangement plan showing subdivision of the storey
 
by fire-resisting construction [see Table 4.6, item 7 and note (4)]
fire-resisting construction
108
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Construction of cavity barriers
4.38
A cavity barrier should be constructed to provide fire resistance of not less
than 30 minutes in respect of integrity and 15 minutes in respect of
insulation (see item 15 of Table 4.1), however, a cavity barrier in a stud
partition or wall may be formed of –
(a) steel at least 0.5 mm thick;
(b) timber at least 38 mm thick;
(c) polyethylene sleeved mineral wool or mineral wool slab, in either case
under compression when installed in the cavity; or
(d) calcium silicate, cement based or gypsum based boards at
least 12 mm thick.
A cavity barrier may be formed by any construction provided for another
purpose if that construction meets the provisions for a cavity barrier.
4.39
A cavity barrier should be tightly fitted and fixed in position. Where this is not
possible, e.g. in the case of a junction with slates or profiled sheeting, the
junction should be fire-stopped in accordance with paragraphs 4.45 to 4.47.
The fixing of a cavity barrier should be such that the performance of the
cavity barrier is unlikely to be made ineffective by –
(a) the movement of the building due to subsidence, shrinkage or thermal
change and movement of the external envelope due to wind;
(b) the collapse in a fire of any service which penetrates it;
(c) the failure in a fire of its fixings or supporting structure; and
(d) the failure in a fire of any material or construction which the cavity
barrier abuts, e.g. if a cavity barrier is connected to a suspended
ceiling, collapse of the ceiling should not cause premature failure of
the cavity barrier.
Cavities not requiring subdivision
4.40
The provisions of paragraph 4.36(b) should not apply to a cavity which is –
(a) in a masonry or concrete external cavity wall complying with
Diagram 4.5;
(b) in a floor void or in a roof void where the cavity does not exceed 30 m
in extent and is enclosed on its lower side by a fire-resisting ceiling
(complying with Diagram 4.7) which extends throughout the building or
compartment;
(c) below a floor next to the ground where the cavity is not greater than
1 m in height or is not normally accessible by people. However, this
should not apply where there is any opening in the floor such that it is
possible for combustible material to accumulate in the cavity (in this
case cavity barriers and access for cleaning should be provided);
(d) formed behind the external skin in rain-screen external wall
construction, or by over-cladding an existing masonry or concrete
external wall or an existing concrete roof, provided that the cavity does
not contain combustible insulation and the provisions of
Table 4.6 Item 9 are complied with; and
109
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 4.9
Provision of cavity barriers in double-skinned profiled
insulated roof sheeting
see para 4.40(e)
void
insulation
insulation
(a) 
Acceptable without cavity barriers
 
where the insulation is in contact
 
with both skins of the sheeting
(b) 
Cavity barriers necessary
Note
See paragraph 4.21 regarding the provision of a firebreak at the 
junction of a double skinned insulated roof and a compartment wall.
(e) between double-skinned, profiled, insulated, roof sheeting provided
that –
(i)
the sheeting is a material of limited combustibility;
(ii) both surfaces of the insulation layer have a surface spread of
flame classification not lower than Class 1 (National class) or
Class C-s3,d2 (European class); and
(iii) the insulation is in contact with the inner and outer skins of
sheeting as shown in Diagram 4.9(a).
4.41
Where the cavity is over an undivided room which –
(a) exceeds the appropriate maximum dimension for a cavity in Table 4.7,
cavity barriers need only be provided on the line of the enclosing walls
of that room, provided that they are not more than 40 m apart and that
the surfaces exposed in the cavity are not lower than Class 1 (National
class) or Class C-s3,d2 (European class); or
(b) exceeds 40 m (in either direction on plan), cavity barriers need not be
provided where –
(i)
the room and the cavity together are compartmented from the
rest of the building;
(ii) an automatic fire detection and fire alarm system complying with
BS 5839-1 is fitted in the building;
(iii) the surface of the ceiling exposed in the cavity is of Class 0
(National class) or Class B-s3,d2 or higher (European class)
and the ceiling supports and fixings in the cavity are
of non-combustible construction;
(iv) the surface spread of flame classification of any pipe insulation
in the cavity is not lower than Class 1 (National class) or Class
C-s3,d2 (European class);
(v) any electrical wiring in the cavity is laid in metal trays or in metal
conduit;
110
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 4.7
Maximum dimension of a cavity in Purpose Group 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7
buildings (1)
Class of surface exposed in cavity (excluding surface
of any pipe, cable or conduit, or insulation
to any pipe)
Maximum dimension of
a cavity in any
direction (m)
Location of cavity
National class(2)
European(2)(3)
class
Between a roof and a ceiling
Any
Any
20
Any other cavity
Class 0 or Class 1
Class A1;
Class A2-s3,d2;
Class B-s3,d2; or
Class C-s3,d2
20
A class other than
Class 0 or Class 1
A class other than
any of the classes
in the row above
10
Notes :
(1) Exceptions to these provisions are given in paragraphs 4.40 and 4.41.
(2) The National classifications do not automatically equate with the equivalent classifications in the European column,
therefore products cannot typically assume a European class unless they have been tested accordingly.
(3) Where a classification includes ‘s3,d2’ this means that there is no limit set for smoke production and/or flaming
droplets/particles.
(vi) any other material in the cavity is a material of limited
combustibility; and
(vii) where the cavity is used as a plenum – the recommendations of
BS 5588-9 in relation to recirculating air distribution systems are
complied with.
Openings in cavity barriers
4.42
There should be no openings in a cavity barrier other than those for –
(a) a fire door which has not less than 30 minutes fire resistance and
complies with paragraphs 4.29 to 4.35;
(b) the passage of a pipe which complies with paragraph 4.43;
(c) the passage of a cable, a conduit or tray containing one or more
cables;
(d) an opening fitted with a suitably mounted automatic fire damper; and
(e) a duct which (unless it is fire-resisting) is fitted with a suitably mounted
automatic fire damper where it passes through the cavity barrier.
111
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Pipes penetrating fire separating elements
4.43
Where a pipe passes through a fire separating element it should be –
(a) provided with a suitable proprietary sealing system which has been
shown by test to maintain the fire resistance of the fire separating
element; or
(b) where a proprietary sealing system is not used –
(i)
of a diameter not more than the relevant nominal internal
diameter given in Table 4.8, with the opening as small as is
practicable and fire-stopped around the pipe; or
(ii) of lead, aluminium, aluminium alloy, fibre-cement or uPVC,
having a maximum internal diameter not more than 160 mm and
be within a non-combustible sleeve [see Table 4.8 Note (1)] as
shown in Diagram 4.10.
Ventilation ducts penetrating fire separating elements
4.44
Where a ventilation or air conditioning duct passes through a fire separating
element it should comply with an appropriate method for maintaining the fire
resistance of the wall, floor or barrier given in BS 5588-9.
Fire dampers should be tested to BS EN 1366-2 and be classified
to BS EN 13501-3. They should have an E classification not less
than 60 minutes. Fire and smoke dampers should also be tested to
BS EN 1366-2 and be classified to BS EN 13501-3. They should
have an ES classification not less than 60 minutes.
Diagram 4.10 Pipes penetrating fire separating elements
see para 4.42(b)
Note:
not less
than 1 m
not less
than 1 m
The opening in the construction
to be as small as practicable with
fire-stopping between sleeve and
construction.
pipe
fire-stopping
sleeve to be 
a sliding fit
112
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 4.8
Maximum nominal internal diameter of pipes passing through fire separating
elements
Pipe material and maximum nominal internal
diameter (mm)
Situation
Non-combustible
material(1)
Lead, aluminium,
aluminium alloy,
uPVC(2), fibre-cement
Any other
material
1
Construction (but not a wall
separating buildings) enclosing a
protected shaft which is not a
stairway or a lift shaft
160
110
40
2
(a)
A wall separating
dwellinghouses
(b)
A compartment wall or
compartment floor between flats
160
160 (stack pipe)(3)
40
110 (branch pipe)(3)
3
Any other situation
160
40
40
Notes:
(1) A non-combustible material (such as cast iron, copper or steel) which if exposed to a temperature of 800°C, will not
soften or fracture to the extent that flame or hot gas will pass through the wall of the pipe.
(2) uPVC pipes complying with either BS 4514 or BS 5255 or BS EN 1329-1.
(3) These diameters are only in relation to pipes forming part of an above-ground drainage system which is enclosed as
shown in Diagram 4.11. In other cases the maximum diameters against Situation 3 apply.
Fire-stopping
4.45
In addition to any other provision in this Technical Booklet for fire-stopping,
fire-stopping should be provided at –
(a) all joints and imperfections of fit between elements which serve as a
barrier to the passage of fire; and
(b) all openings for pipes, ducts, cables, conduits or trays which pass
through any fire separating element, and such openings should be –
(i)
as few in number as possible; and
(ii) as small as is practicable.
4.46
To prevent the displacement of fire-stopping it should be supported by, or
reinforced with, a material of limited combustibility –
(a) where it is a non-rigid material (unless it has been shown by test not to
require such support or reinforcement); and
(b) in all locations where its unsupported span is more than 100 mm.
4.47
In addition to proprietary fire-stopping and sealing systems, which have
been shown by test to be suitable, the following materials may be suitable as
fire-stopping in situations appropriate to the particular material –
113
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

(i)
cement mortar;
(ii) gypsum based plaster;
(iii) cement or gypsum based vermiculite/perlite mixes;
(iv) glass fibre, crushed rock, blast furnace slag or ceramic based
products (with or without resin binders); and
(v) intumescent mastics.
Flues and heating appliance ventilation ducts penetrating
compartment walls and compartment floors
4.48
Where a flue, a duct containing more than one flue, or an appliance
ventilation duct –
(a) passes through a compartment floor or compartment wall; or
(b) is built into a compartment wall,
the walls enclosing the flue or duct should have a period of fire resistance of
not less than half that required for the compartment wall or compartment
floor and be of non-combustible construction, as shown in Diagram 4.12.
Diagram 4.11 Enclosure for drainage or water supply pipes
see Table 4.8 note (3)
vent pipe
casing
compartment floor
roof space
provide casing if
wall separating
dwellinghouses
is penetrated by branch
pipe at this storey
enclosure
wall separating
dwellinghouses
compartment floor
carried through to
seal enclosure –
provide fire-stopping
between stack pipe
and floor
enclosure
compartment wall
intermediate
 
floor
intermediate
 
floor
floor carried through to
seal enclosure – provide
fire-stopping between
stack pipe and floor
enclosure
Intermediate floor
carried through to
seal enclosure –
provide fire-stopping
between stack pipe
and floor
enclosure
compartment wall
fire-stopping
fire-stopping
casing
compartment floor
stack pipe
stack pipe
(a)    Dwellinghouse with any number of storeys
(b)    Other buildings
Notes:
1
The enclosure should –
2
The casing should –
(a)
be imperforate except for an opening for a
 
pipe or an access panel;
(a) be bounded by a compartment wall or floor,
 
an outside wall, an intermediate floor or a
 
casing [see specification at (2)];
(b) have internal surfaces (except framing members) 
 
of Class 0 (National class) or Class B-s3,d2 or
 
higher (European class);
(b)
not be of sheet metal; and
(c)
have (including any access panel) not less
 
than 30 minutes fire resistance.
(c) not have an access panel which opens into a
 
circulation space or a bedroom; and
3
The opening for a pipe, either in the structure
 
or the casing, should be as small as possible
 
and fire-stopped around the pipe.
(d) be used only for drainage, water supply or vent
 
pipes for a drainage system.
114
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 4.12 Flues in compartment walls and compartment floors
see para 4.48
compartment
wall
compartment
wall
compartment
floor
flue
flue
flue
flue wall
*
*
*
flue wall
flue wall
(a)  Section of flue passing
 
through a compartment
 
floor
(b)  Plans of flues built into
 
compartment wall
Note:
In all cases flue walls should have a fire resistance of at least
 
one half of that required for the compartment wall or compartment
 
floor and be of non-combustible construction.
*
115
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Car parks for light vehicles
4.49
All materials used in the construction of a building, separated part or
compartment used for car parking should be non-combustible other than –
(a) a surface finish which meets the relevant provisions of
Sections 3 and 5 which –
(i)
is applied to a floor or roof of the car park; and
(ii) is applied within any adjoining building, separated part or
compartment – to the structure enclosing the car park;
(b) a fire door;
(c) an attendant’s kiosk which does not exceed 15 m2 in area; and
(d) any shop mobility facility which does not exceed 30 m2 in floor area.
Open-sided car parks
4.50
A car park may be regarded as an open-sided car park for the purposes of
Table 4.2 [i.e. Purpose Group 7(b)(i)] where, in addition to complying with
paragraph 4.49 –
(a) it has no basement storeys;
(b) it is naturally ventilated by permanent openings, at each car parking
level, having an aggregate ventilation area of not less than 5% of the
floor area at that level, with not less than half that ventilation area
equally divided in two opposing walls and distributed to provide
effective cross-ventilation; and
(c) where the building is also used for any other purpose – that part
forming the car park is a separated part.
Car parks which are not open-sided
4.51
Where a car park does not comply with the provisions of paragraph 4.50 it
should not be regarded as open-sided for the purposes of Table 4.2 [i.e. it
falls in Purpose Group 7(b)(ii)]. However, there is a need for ventilation in
such a car park, therefore in addition to the provisions of paragraph 4.49 it
should have either –
(a) natural ventilation at each storey –
(i)
by permanent openings at each car parking level, having an
aggregate ventilation area of not less than 2.5% of the floor
area at that level, with not less than half that ventilation area
equally divided in two opposing walls and distributed to provide
effective cross-ventilation; or
(ii) by suitable vents at ceiling level on each car parking level
having an aggregate area of permanent opening not less than
2.5% of the floor area and so arranged as to have a through
flow of air; or
116
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

(b) a system of mechanical ventilation where –
(i)
the system is independent of any other ventilation system and
designed to operate at 6 air changes per hour for normal
extraction and at 10 air changes per hour in a fire condition;
(ii) the system is designed to operate in two parts, each capable of
extracting 50% of the rates set out in (i) above and designed so
that each part may operate singly or simultaneously; each part
of the system should have an independent power supply which
will operate in the event of failure of the main supply;
(iii) extract points are arranged so that 50% are at high level and
50% at low level; and
(iv) the fans are rated to run at 300ºC for not less than 60 minutes,
and the ductwork and fixings are constructed of materials
having a melting point of not less than 800ºC.
(See Technical Booklet K for guidance on normal ventilation of car parks.)
117
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Shopping complexes
4.52
Whilst the provisions in this Technical Booklet about shops should generally
be capable of application in cases where a shop is contained in a single
separated building, the provisions may not be appropriate where a shop
forms part of a complex. These may include covered malls providing access
to a number of shops and common servicing areas. In particular, the
provisions about maximum compartment size may be difficult to meet,
bearing in mind that it would generally not be practical to compartment a
shop from a mall serving it. (To a lesser extent, the provisions about fire
resistance, walls separating shop units, surfaces and boundary distances
may also pose problems.)
4.53
To ensure a satisfactory standard of fire safety in shopping complexes,
alternative measures and additional compensatory features to the provisions
set out in this Section are needed. Such features are set out in Sections 5
and 6 of BS 5588-10 and the relevant recommendations of those sections
should be followed.
118
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Insulating core panels used for internal structures
4.54
Insulating core panel systems are used for external cladding as well as for
internal structures. However, whilst both types of panel system have unique
fire behaviour characteristics, it is those used for internal structures that can
present particular problems with regard to fire spread.
The most common use of insulating core panels, when used for internal
structures, is to provide an enclosure in which a chilled or sub zero
environment can be generated for the production, preservation, storage and
distribution of perishable foodstuffs. However, this type of construction is
also used in many other applications, particularly where the maintenance of
a hygienic environment is essential.
These panels typically consist of an inner core sandwiched between, and
bonded to facings of galvanised steel, often with a PVC facing for hygiene
purposes. The panels are then formed into a structure by jointing systems,
usually designed to provide an insulating and hygienic performance. The
panel structure can be free standing, but is usually attached to the building
structure by lightweight fixings or hangers in the case of ceilings.
The most common forms of insulation in present use are polyisocyanurate,
mineral fibre, phenolic, polystyrene (cold stores), extruded polystyrene and
composite polymers such as syntactic phenolic.
Fire behaviour of the core materials and fixing systems
4.55
The degradation of polymeric materials can be expected when exposed to
radiated/conducted heat from a fire, with the resulting production of large
quantities of smoke. It is recognised that the potential for problems in fires
involving mineral fibre cores is less than those for polymeric core materials.
In addition, irrespective of the type of core material, the panel, when
exposed to the high temperatures of a developed fire, will tend to delaminate
between the facing and core material, due to a combination of expansion of
the metal facing and softening of the bond line.
Therefore once it is involved, either directly or indirectly in a fire, the panel
will have lost most of its structural integrity. Stability will then be dependant
on the method of fixing to the structure. For systems that are not fixed
through both facings the stability of the system will then depend on the
residual structural strength of the non-exposed facing, the interlocking joint
between panels and the fixing system.
Most jointing or fixing systems for these systems have an extremely limited
structural integrity performance in developed fire conditions. If the fire starts
to heat up the support fixings or structure to which they are attached, then
there is a real chance of total collapse of the panel system.
Where panels are used as the lining to a building the insulating nature of
these panels, together with their sealed joints, means that fire can spread
behind the panels, hidden from the occupants of occupied rooms/spaces.
With some thermoplastic cores fire can also spread between the panel
facings.
119
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

This can prove to be a particular problem to firefighters as, due to the
insulating properties of the cores, it may not be possible to track the spread
of fire, even using infra red detection equipment. This difficulty, together with
that of controlling the fire spread within and behind the panels, is likely to
have a detrimental effect on the performance of the fixing systems,
potentially leading to their complete and unexpected collapse, together with
any associated equipment.
Firefighting
4.56
When compared with other types of construction techniques, these panel
systems therefore provide a unique combination of problems for firefighters,
including –
(a) hidden fire spread within panels with thermoplastic cores;
(b) production of large quantities of black toxic smoke and rapid fire
spread leading to flashover; and
(c) hidden fire behind lining systems.
These three characteristics are common to both polyurethane and
polystyrene cored panels, although the rate of fire spread in polyurethane
cores is significantly less than that of polystyrene cores, especially when
any external heat source is removed.
In addition, irrespective of the type of panel core, all systems are susceptible
to delamination of the steel facing, collapse of the system and hidden fire
spread behind the system.
Design recommendations
4.57
To identify the appropriate solution, a risk assessment approach should be
adopted. This would involve identifying the potential fire risk within the
enclosures formed by the panel systems and then adopting one or more of
the following at the design stage –
(a) removing the risk;
(b) separating the risk from the panels by an appropriate distance;
(c) providing a fire suppression system for the risk;
(d) providing a fire suppression system for the enclosure;
(e) providing fire-resisting panels; and
(f)
specifying appropriate materials/fixing and jointing systems.
In summary the performance of the building structure, including the
insulating envelope, the superstructure, the substructure, etc., must be
considered in relation to their performance in the event of a fire.
120
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Specifying panel core materials
4.58
Where at all possible the specification of panels with core materials
appropriate to the application will help ensure an acceptable level of
performance for panel systems, when involved in fire conditions. The
following are examples in the provision of core materials which may be
appropriate to the application concerned–
(a) Mineral fibre cores – cooking areas, hot areas, bakeries, fire breaks in
combustible panels, fire stop panels and general fire protection.
(b) All cores – chill stores, cold stores, blast freezers, food factories and
clean rooms.
Note – Core materials may be used in other circumstances where a risk
assessment has been made and other appropriate fire precautions have
been put in place.
Specifying materials/fixing and jointing systems
4.59
The following are methods by which the stability of panel systems may be
improved in the event of a fire, although they may not all be appropriate in
every case.
(a) Insulating envelopes, support systems, and supporting structure
should be designed to allow the envelope to remain structurally stable
by alternative means such as catenary action following failure of the
bond line between insulant core and facing materials. This particularly
relates to ceilings and will typically require positive attachment of the
lower faces of the insulant panels to supports.
(b) The building superstructure, together with any elements providing
support to the insulating envelope, should be protected to prevent
early collapse of the structure or the envelope.
Note – Irrespective of the type of panel provided, it will remain
necessary to ensure that the supplementary support method
supporting the panels remains stable for an appropriate time period
under fire conditions. It is not practical to fire protect light gauge steel
members such as purlins and sheeting rails which provide stability to
building superstructures and these may be compromised at an early
stage of a fire. Supplementary fire-protected heavier gauge steelwork
members could be provided at wider intervals than purlins to provide
restraint in the event of a fire.
(c) In designated high risk areas, consideration should be given to
incorporating non-combustible insulant cored panels into wall and
ceiling construction at intervals, or incorporating strips of non-
combustible material into specified wall and ceiling panels, in order to
provide a barrier to fire propagation through the insulant.
(d) Correct detailing of the insulating envelope should ensure that the
combustible insulant is fully encapsulated by non-combustible facing
materials which remain in place during a fire.
(e) The panels should incorporate pre-finished and sealed areas for
penetration of services.
121
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

In addition, the details of construction of the insulating envelope should,
particularly in relation to combustible insulant cores, prevent the core
materials from becoming exposed to the fire and contributing to the fire load.
General
4.60
Generally panels or panel systems should not be used to support machinery
or other permanent loads.
Any cavity created by the arrangement of panels, their supporting structure
or other building elements should be provided with suitable cavity barriers.
Examples of possible solutions and general guidance on insulating core
panels construction can be found in the relevant chapters of the Design,
construction, specification and fire management of insulated envelopes for
temperature controlled environments published by the International
Association of Cold Storage Contractors (European Division).
122
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Section 5
External fire spread
5.1
This Section contains provisions relating to the design and construction of –
(a) external walls – in order that the risk of ignition from an external
source, the spread of flame over the external surface and the spread
of fire from one building to another are restricted; and
(b) roofs – in order that the risk of spread of flame and of fire penetration
from an external source are restricted.
Construction of external walls
5.2
The external walls of a building are elements of structure and other than
those areas which may be unprotected (as determined in accordance with
paragraphs 5.10 to 5.12) should have the appropriate period of fire
resistance given in Section 4.
5.3
The external surface of a wall should meet the requirements given in
Table 5.1 relevant to the height of the building and the distance between the
building and the relevant boundary. The provisions of Table 5.1 are illustrated
in Diagram 5.1.
In the case of the external wall being of “rainscreen” construction (i.e. an
outer cladding with a drained and ventilated cavity behind) the surface of the
outer cladding which faces the cavity should also meet the relevant
requirements of Table 5.1.
5.4
Where a building has a storey the floor of which is 18 m or more above
ground level, any materials used for supporting cladding and any insulation
material incorporated within the wall construction (other than a masonry
cavity wall complying with Diagram 4.5) should be a material of limited
combustibility. [Advice on the incorporation of thermal insulation in such
walls is given in Building Research Establishment Report – Fire
performance of external thermal insulation for walls of multi-storey buildings
(BR 135: 1988).]
Portal frames
5.5
Frequently, the provisions of Section 4 do not require the portal frames of a
single storey building to have fire resistance except where the column
members of those frames are within, or support, an external wall, which
under paragraph 5.2, is required to have fire resistance. Where this occurs
both the column and rafter members should have fire resistance, as the
moment-resisting connections mean the portal frame acts as a single
element. However, in the case of a steel portal frame which has been
designed in accordance with the method set out in Fire and steel
construction: Single Storey Steel Framed Buildings in Fire Boundary
Conditions, only those members within or supporting an external wall
requiring fire resistance, need have fire resistance.
123
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 5.1
Provisions for external surfaces of walls
Maximum height of
building
(m)
Distance of wall from any point on the relevant boundary
Less than 1 m
1 m or more
Less than 18
Class 0 (National class)
or Class B-s3,d2
or higher
(European class)
(a)
Purpose Group 5 – no requirement other than as
described in Note 1
(b)
All other purpose groups – no requirement
18 or more
Class 0 (National class)
or Class B-s3,d2
or higher
(European class)
(a)
Surfaces 18 m or more above ground level –
Class 0 (National class) or Class B-s3,d2
or higher (European class)
(b)
Surfaces less than 18 m above ground level –
see Note 2
Notes:
1. In a Purpose Group 5 building of more than one storey any part of a wall which is less than 10 m above –
(a) the ground;
(b) a roof to which the public have access; or
(c) any other part of the building to which the public have access,
should have an index of performance (I) of not more than 20 when tested to BS 476: Part 6 (National class); have a
classification of Class C-s3,d2 or higher (European class) surface; or be timber cladding at least 9 mm thick.
2. Surfaces less than 18 m above the ground should – be of a material which has an index of performance (I) of not
more than 20 when tested to BS 476: Part 6 (National class); be of a classification Class C-s3,d2 (European class)
or higher; or be timber cladding at least 9 mm thick.
3. The National classifications do not automatically equate with the equivalent European classifications, therefore
products cannot typically assume a European class unless they have been tested accordingly.
4. When a classification includes ‘s3,d2’, this means that there is no limit set for smoke production and/or flaming
droplets/particles.
124
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 5.1
Provisions for external surfaces of walls
see para 5.3
any Purpose Group
(other than 5)
Purpose Group 5
less
than
10 m
less
than
10 m
less
than
10 m
less
than
1 m
1 m or
 more
less
than
1 m
1 m or
 more
*
*
less
than
1 m
less
than
1 m
1 m or
 more
1 m or
 more
Maximum height of building – less than 18 m
any Purpose Group
Key
relevant boundary
roof to which
the public have
access
less
than
18 m
less
than
18 m
External wall surface classification
less
than
1 m
Class 0 (National class); or
Class B-s3,d2 or higher 
(European class)
1 m or
 more
no provision
in respect of
the boundary
indicated
less
than
1 m
1 m or
 more
index (I) not more than 20
(National class);
Class C-s3,d2 or higher 
(European class); or
timber cladding at least
9 mm thick
Maximum height of building – 18 m or more
125
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Space separation – External walls
5.6
Protection against the external spread of fire from one building to another is
related to –
(i)
the distance between a building and each of its relevant boundaries
(see paragraph 5.9); and
(ii) the extent of the unprotected area in the side of the building which
faces that boundary.
The basic provisions are outlined in paragraph 5.13 and methods of meeting
those provisions are given in paragraphs 5.14 to 5.19.
The provisions are based on a number of assumptions, and whilst some of
these may differ from the circumstances of a particular case, together they
enable a reasonable standard of space separation to be achieved.
The provisions limit the extent of openings and other unprotected areas in
the sides of a building (including areas with a combustible surface) which
would not give adequate protection against the external spread of fire from
one building to another.
The assumptions for establishing space separation are –
(a) that the fire will involve a complete compartment but will not spread to
other compartments;
(b) that the intensity of a fire is related to the use of the building and will
be moderated by a sprinkler system where it is provided;
(c) that a building, which has an identical elevation, is located on the
opposite side of, and at the same distance from, the relevant
boundary; and
(d) that radiation from that part of the external wall, which has the fire
resistance required by Section 4, is discounted unless its external
surface is combustible as described in paragraph 5.10.
5.7
Where a reduced separation distance is desired it may be advantageous to
construct compartments of a smaller size.
Boundaries
5.8
The use of the distance to a boundary rather than to another building, in
measuring the separation distance, makes it possible to calculate the
allowable proportion of unprotected areas, regardless of whether there is a
building on an adjoining site, and regardless of the location of that building,
and the extent of any unprotected areas that it might have.
Usually only the distance to the actual boundary of the site needs to be
considered. But in some circumstances, when the site boundary adjoins a
space where further development is unlikely, such as a road, then part of the
adjoining space may be included as falling within the relevant boundary for
the purposes of this Section.
126
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

5.9
For a boundary to be a relevant boundary it should coincide with, be parallel
to or be at an angle of not more than 80° to the side of the building
(see Diagram 5.2).
A relevant boundary may be –
(a) the actual boundary of the premises on which the building is located;
(b) the centre line of a road, river, canal or railway which adjoins the
actual boundary; or
(c) a notional boundary established where two or more buildings (one of
which is of Purpose Group 1, 2 or 5) are to share the same site. A
notional boundary should be assumed so that both buildings comply
with the space separation distances required by this Section.
Where a notional boundary is to be established and one of the
buildings is an existing building, that building should be treated as if it
were a new building.
Diagram 5.2
Relevant boundaries
see para 5.9
boundary not more than
80º to side C
minimum separation
distance for existing
building
not more than 80º
boundary
coincides
with side D
existing
building
C
B
D
proposed building
A
notional boundary *
for side B
boundary parallel to
side A
centre line of road, river, canal or railway
Note:
* Notional boundary is only established where one or both of the buildings is of Purpose Group 1,2 or 5.
127
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Unprotected areas in external walls
5.10
Any part of an external wall which has less fire resistance than that required
by Section 4 should be considered to be an unprotected area.
Where an external wall has the appropriate fire resistance but has a
combustible material more than 1 mm thick as its external surface, that wall
should be considered to be an unprotected area amounting to half the actual
area of the combustible material as shown in Diagram 5.3. However, where
such a combustible material has a Class 0 (National class) or Class B-s3,d2
or higher (European class) classification it need not be considered to be
such an unprotected area.
Any part of the external wall of a protected stairway should be discounted
when calculating unprotected areas. (However, Section 2 and Section 6
contain provisions relating to the relationship between the external walls of
protected stairways and the unprotected areas of other parts of the
building.)
Small unprotected areas may be discounted where they occur in an
otherwise protected area of wall, provided that they do not exceed the areas
and comply with the minimum spacing shown in Diagram 5.4.
Diagram 5.3
Combustible material on external walls
see para 5.10
area of fire-
resisting wall
with combustible
material = a x b
a
area of wall to be
counted as
unprotected area
= 0.5 a x b,
b
area of fire-resisting
wall without combustible
surface material
128
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

5.11
An external wall situated within 1 m of any point on its relevant boundary
should have no unprotected areas other than those shown in Diagram 5.4.
5.12
An external wall situated 1 m or more from any point on its relevant
boundary may have unprotected areas provided that their total area does
not exceed that given by the most favourable calculation method given in
paragraphs 5.13 to 5.19. Where a building is uncompartmented any part of
an external wall which is more than 30 m above ground level may be
discounted in the calculation.
Diagram 5.4
Unprotected areas which may be discounted
see para 5.10, 5.11 and 5.17
compartment
floor
compartment
wall
Key
an unprotected area of not more than 1 m2
which may consist of two or more smaller
areas amounting to not more than 1 m2
within an area of 1 m x 1 m
Dimensional restrictions
4 m minimum distance
an unprotected area of not more than 0.1 m2
1.5 m minimum distance
the external wall of a protected stairway
dimension not restricted
129
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Provisions for and calculation of space separation and unprotected
areas
5.13
A building should be separated from its relevant boundaries by at least half
the distance at which the total thermal radiation intensity received from all
unprotected areas in the external walls would be 12.6 kW/m2 (in still air)
assuming the radiation intensity at each unprotected area is –
(a) 84 kW/m2 where the building is of Purpose Group 1, 2, 3, 5 or 7(b); or
(b) 168 kW/m2 where the building is of any other purpose group.
Where a building is compartmented each compartment should be calculated
separately.
Where a building or compartment is fitted throughout with a sprinkler system
complying with the relevant provisions of BS 5306-2
or BS EN 12845 for the appropriate occupancy, the thermal radiation
intensities in (a) and (b) and the distances calculated using the methods
given in paragraphs 5.16 to 5.19 may be halved subject to there being a
minimum distance of 1 m. Alternatively, the amount of unprotected area may
be doubled if the calculated boundary distance is maintained.
5.14
Building Research Establishment Report – External fire spread: building
separation and boundary distances (BR 187: 1991) gives the method by
which the thermal radiation intensity should be calculated for paragraph
5.13. It also gives detailed explanations, with worked examples, of Method 3
(paragraph 5.18) and Method 4 (paragraph 5.19).
5.15
Where a building is compartmented and contains an atrium in accordance
with paragraph 4.23(d) the recommendations of BS 5588-7: Clause 28.2
may be followed for calculation purposes.
Method 1 (Small residential buildings)
5.16
This method may only be used for buildings in Purpose Groups 1 and 2(b)
which do not exceed three storeys in height and are not more than 24 m in
length. The maximum total area of unprotected areas in the side of a
building should not exceed that given in Table 5.2 for the relevant minimum
distance between that side and its boundary.
Table 5.2
Unprotected areas in small residential buildings
(Method 1)
Minimum distance
between side
of building and
relevant boundary (m)
Maximum total area
of unprotected
areas (m2)
1
5.6
2
12
3
18
4
24
5
30
6
No limit
130
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Method 2 (Small buildings and compartments)
5.17
This method may be used for buildings and compartments of any purpose
group which do not exceed 10 m in height [this height limit does not apply to
buildings of Purpose Group 7(b)]. The maximum total percentage of
unprotected area in the side of a building should not exceed that given in
Table 5.3 for the appropriate purpose group and minimum distance between
that side and its relevant boundary. When calculating the unprotected area,
any area which complies with paragraph 5.10 and Diagram 5.4 may be
discounted.
Table 5.3
Unprotected areas in small buildings and compartments (Method 2)
Minimum distance between side of building and
relevant boundary (m)
Purpose groups
Maximum total percentage
of unprotected area
(%)
1, 2, 3 and 5
4, 6 and 7 *
N/A
1
4
1
2
8
2.5
5
20
5
10
40
7.5
15
60
10
20
80
12.5
25
100
Notes:
*
In the case of a car park in Purpose Group 7(b) the distances given for Purpose Groups 1, 2, 3 and 5 may be used.
N/A = not applicable.
Intermediate values may be obtained by interpolation.
131
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Method 3 (Enclosing rectangle)
5.18
This method may be used for buildings and compartments of any purpose
group. A building or compartment should be so situated that no point on its
relevant boundary is –
(a) between the relevant plane of reference and the side of the building;
and
(b) closer to the relevant plane of reference than that given in Table 5.4 for
the appropriate purpose group, dimensions of enclosing rectangle and
unprotected area percentage.
A plane of reference is a vertical plane which touches the side, or some part
of the side, of a building or compartment but which (however, far extended)
does not pass within the structure (excluding balconies, copings and similar
projections) of that building or compartment. The relevant plane of reference
should be chosen to give the least separation distance between it and the
relevant boundary. Normally, it is best for the plane of reference to be
parallel to the relevant boundary.
The enclosing rectangle is the rectangle, of the least width and height given
in Table 5.4, on the relevant plane of reference, which will –
(i)
enclose all the outer edges of the unprotected areas in the external
wall of the building or compartment (other than any which is at an
angle of 80° or more to the plane of reference). The outer edges
should be projected to the plane of reference by lines perpendicular to
such plane; and
(ii) have two horizontal sides.
The total unprotected area is found by adding the areas, as projected on the
plane of reference, of all unprotected areas.
The unprotected percentage is calculated from –
unprotected
=
total unprotected area
x 100
percentage
enclosing rectangle area
The minimum distance from the plane of reference to the relevant boundary
is given in Table 5.4, and where the unprotected percentage is between the
values given in the Table the distance may be obtained by linear
interpolation.
132
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 5.4
Permitted unprotected percentages in relation to enclosing rectangles
(Method 3)
Width of
enclosing
rectangle
(m)
Distance from relevant boundary for unprotected percentage not exceeding
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Minimum boundary distance (m) – figures in brackets are for Purpose Groups 1, 2, 3, 5 and 7(b)
Enclosing rectangle 3 m high
3
1.0(1.0)
1.5(1.0)
2.0(1.0)
2.0(1.5)
2.5(1.5)
2.5(1.5)
2.5(2.0)
3.0(2.0)
3.0(2.0)
6
1.5(1.0)
2.0(1.0)
2.5(1.5)
3.0(2.0)
3.0(2.0)
3.5(2.0)
3.5(2.5)
4.0(2.5)
4.0(3.0)
9
1.5(1.0)
2.5(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
3.5(2.0)
4.0(2.5)
4.0(2.5)
4.5(3.0)
5.0(3.0)
5.0(3.5)
12
2.0(1.0)
2.5(1.5)
3.0(2.0)
3.5(2.0)
4.0(2.5)
4.5(3.0)
5.0(3.0)
5.5(3.5)
5.5(3.5)
15
2.0(1.0)
2.5(1.5)
3.5(2.0)
4.0(2.5)
4.5(2.5)
5.0(3.0)
5.5(3.5)
6.0(3.5)
6.0(4.0)
18
2.0(1.0)
2.5(1.5)
3.5(2.0)
4.0(2.5)
5.0(2.5)
5.0(3.0)
6.0(3.5)
6.5(4.0)
6.5(4.0)
21
2.0(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
3.5(2.0)
4.5(2.5)
5.0(3.0)
5.5(3.0)
6.0(3.5)
6.5(4.0)
7.0(4.5)
24
2.0(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
3.5(2.0)
4.5(2.5)
5.0(3.0)
5.5(3.5)
6.0(3.5)
7.0(4.0)
7.5(4.5)
27
2.0(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
4.0(2.0)
4.5(2.5)
5.5(3.0)
6.0(3.5)
6.5(4.0)
7.0(4.0)
7.5(4.5)
30
2.0(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
4.0(2.0)
4.5(2.5)
5.5(3.0)
6.0(3.5)
6.5(4.0)
7.5(4.0)
8.0(4.5)
40
2.0(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
4.0(2.0)
5.0(2.5)
5.5(3.0)
6.5(3.5)
7.0(4.0)
8.0(4.0)
8.5(5.0)
50
2.0(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
4.0(2.0)
5.0(2.5)
6.0(3.0)
6.5(3.5)
7.5(4.0)
8.0(4.0)
9.0(5.0)
60
2.0(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
4.0(2.0)
5.0(2.5)
6.0(3.0)
7.0(3.5)
7.5(4.0)
8.5(4.0)
9.5(5.0)
80
2.0(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
4.0(2.0)
5.0(2.5)
6.0(3.0)
7.0(3.5)
8.0(4.0)
9.0(4.0)
9.5(5.0)
No limit
2.0(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
4.0(2.0)
5.0(2.5)
6.0(3.0)
7.0(3.5)
8.0(4.0)
9.0(4.0)
10.0(5.0)
Enclosing rectangle 6 m high
3
1.5(1.0)
2.0(1.0)
2.5(1.5)
3.0(2.0)
3.0(2.0)
3.5(2.0)
3.5(2.5)
4.0(2.5)
4.0(3.0)
6
2.0(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
3.5(2.0)
4.0(2.5)
4.5(3.0)
5.0(3.0)
5.5(3.5)
5.5(4.0)
6.0(4.0)
9
2.5(1.0)
3.5(2.0)
4.5(2.5)
5.0(3.0)
5.5(3.5)
6.0(4.0)
6.0(4.5)
7.0(4.5)
7.0(5.0)
12
3.0(1.5)
4.0(2.5)
5.0(3.0)
5.5(3.5)
6.5(4.0)
7.0(4.5)
7.5(5.0)
8.0(5.0)
8.5(5.5)
15
3.0(1.5)
4.5(2.5)
5.5(3.0)
6.0(4.0)
7.0(4.5)
7.5(5.0)
8.0(5.5)
9.0(5.5)
9.0(6.0)
18
3.5(1.5)
4.5(2.5)
5.5(3.5)
6.5(4.0)
7.5(4.5)
8.0(5.0)
9.0(5.5)
9.5(6.0)
10.0(6.5)
21
3.5(1.5)
5.0(2.5)
6.0(3.5)
7.0(4.0)
8.0(5.0)
9.0(5.5)
9.5(6.0)
10.0(6.5)
10.5(7.0)
24
3.5(1.5)
5.0(2.5)
6.0(3.5)
7.0(4.5)
8.5(5.0)
9.5(5.5)
10.0(6.0)
10.5(7.0)
11.0(7.0)
27
3.5(1.5)
5.0(2.5)
6.5(3.5)
7.5(4.5)
8.5(5.0)
9.5(6.0)
10.5(6.5)
11.0(7.0)
12.0(7.5)
30
3.5(1.5)
5.0(2.5)
6.5(3.5)
8.0(4.5)
9.0(5.0)
10.0(6.0)
11.0(6.5)
12.0(7.0)
12.5(8.0)
40
3.5(1.5)
5.5(2.5)
7.0(3.5)
8.5(4.5)
10.0(5.5)
11.0(6.5)
12.0(7.0)
13.0(8.0)
14.0(8.5)
50
3.5(1.5)
5.5(2.5)
7.5(3.5)
9.0(4.5)
10.5(5.5)
11.5(6.5)
13.0(7.5)
14.0(8.0)
15.0(9.0)
60
3.5(1.5)
5.5(2.5)
7.5(3.5)
9.5(5.0)
11.0(5.5)
12.0(6.5)
13.5(7.5)
15.0(8.5)
16.0(9.5)
80
3.5(1.5)
6.0(2.5)
7.5(3.5)
9.5(5.0)
11.5(6.0)
13.0(7.0)
14.5(7.5)
16.0(8.5)
17.5(9.5)
100
3.5(1.5)
6.0(2.5)
8.0(3.5)
10.0(5.0)
12.0(6.0)
13.5(7.0)
15.0(8.0)
16.5(8.5)
18.0(10.0)
120
3.5(1.5)
6.0(2.5)
8.0(3.5)
10.0(5.0)
12.0(6.0)
14.0(7.0)
15.5(8.0)
17.0(8.5)
19.0(10.0)
No limit
3.5(1.5)
6.0(2.5)
8.0(3.5)
10.0(5.0)
12.0(6.0)
14.0(7.0)
16.0(8.0)
18.0(8.5)
19.0(10.0)
133
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 5.4
Permitted unprotected percentages in relation to enclosing rectangles
(Method 3) (cont’d)
Width of
enclosing
rectangle
(m)
Distance from relevant boundary for unprotected percentage not exceeding
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Minimum boundary distance (m) – figures in brackets are for Purpose Groups 1, 2, 3, 5 and 7(b)
Enclosing rectangle 9 m high
3
1.5(1.0)
2.5(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
3.5(2.0)
4.0(2.5)
4.0(2.5)
4.5(3.0)
5.0(3.0)
5.0(3.5)
6
2.5(1.0)
3.5(2.0)
4.5(2.5)
5.0(3.0)
5.5(3.5)
6.0(4.0)
6.5(4.5)
7.0(4.5)
7.0(5.0)
9
3.5(1.5)
4.5(2.5)
5.5(3.5)
6.0(4.0)
6.5(4.5)
7.5(5.0)
8.0(5.5)
8.5(5.5)
9.0(6.0)
12
3.5(1.5)
5.0(3.0)
6.0(3.5)
7.0(4.5)
7.5(5.0)
8.5(5.5)
9.0(6.0)
9.5(6.5)
10.5(7.0)
15
4.0(2.0)
5.5(3.0)
6.5(4.0)
7.5(5.0)
8.5(5.5)
9.5(6.0)
10.0(6.5)
11.0(7.0)
11.5(7.5)
18
4.5(2.0)
6.0(3.5)
7.0(4.5)
8.5(5.0)
9.5(6.0)
10.0(6.5)
11.0(7.0)
12.0(8.0)
12.5(8.5)
21
4.5(2.0)
6.5(3.5)
7.5(4.5)
9.0(5.5)
10.0(6.5)
11.0(7.0)
12.0(7.5)
13.0(8.5)
13.5(9.0)
24
5.0(2.0)
6.5(3.5)
8.0(5.0)
9.5(5.5)
11.0(6.5)
12.0(7.5)
13.0(8.0)
13.5(9.0)
14.5(9.5)
27
5.0(2.0)
7.0(3.5)
8.5(5.0)
10.0(6.0)
11.5(7.0)
12.5(7.5)
13.5(8.5)
14.5(9.5)
15.0(10.0)
30
5.0(2.0)
7.0(3.5)
9.0(5.0)
10.5(6.0)
12.0(7.0)
13.0(8.0)
14.0(9.0)
15.0(9.5)
16.0(10.5)
40
5.5(2.0)
7.5(3.5)
9.5(5.5)
11.5(6.5)
13.0(7.5)
14.5(8.5)
15.5(9.5)
17.0(10.5)
17.5(11.5)
50
5.5(2.0)
8.0(4.0)
10.0(5.5)
12.5(6.5)
14.0(8.0)
15.5(9.0)
17.0(10.0)
18.5(11.5)
19.5(12.5)
60
5.5(2.0)
8.0(4.0)
11.0(5.5)
13.0(7.0)
15.0(8.0)
16.5(9.5)
18.0(11.0)
19.5(11.5)
21.0(13.0)
80
5.5(2.0)
8.5(4.0)
11.5(5.5)
13.5(7.0)
16.0(8.5)
17.5(10.0)
19.5(11.5)
21.5(12.5)
23.0(13.5)
100
5.5(2.0)
8.5(4.0)
11.5(5.5)
14.5(7.0)
16.5(8.5)
18.5(10.0)
21.0(11.5)
22.5(12.5)
24.5(14.5)
120
5.5(2.0)
8.5(4.0)
11.5(5.5)
14.5(7.0)
17.0(8.5)
19.5(10.0)
21.5(11.5)
23.5(12.5)
26.0(14.5)
No Limit
5.5(2.0)
8.5(4.0)
11.5(5.5)
15.0(7.0)
17.5(8.5)
20.0(10.5)
22.5(12.0)
24.5(12.5)
27.0(15.0)
Enclosing rectangle 12 m high
3
2.0(1.0)
2.5(1.5)
3.0(2.0)
3.5(2.0)
4.0(2.5)
4.5(3.0)
5.0(3.0)
5.5(3.5)
5.5(3.5)
6
3.0(1.5)
4.0(2.5)
5.0(3.0)
5.5(3.5)
6.5(4.0)
7.0(4.5)
7.5(5.0)
8.0(5.0)
8.5(5.5)
9
3.5(1.5)
5.0(3.0)
6.0(3.5)
7.0(4.5)
7.5(5.0)
8.5(5.5)
9.0(6.0)
9.5(6.5)
10.5(7.0)
12
4.5(1.5)
6.0(3.5)
7.0(4.5)
8.0(5.0)
9.0(6.0)
9.5(6.5)
11.0(7.0)
11.5(7.5)
12.0(8.0)
15
5.0(2.0)
6.5(3.5)
8.0(5.0)
9.0(5.5)
10.0(6.5)
11.0(7.0)
12.0(8.0)
13.0(8.5)
13.5(9.0)
18
5.0(2.5)
7.0(4.0)
8.5(5.0)
10.0(6.0)
11.0(7.0)
12.0(7.5)
13.0(8.5)
14.0(9.0)
14.5(10.0)
21
5.5(2.5)
7.5(4.0)
9.0(5.5)
10.5(6.5)
12.0(7.5)
13.0(8.5)
14.0(9.0)
15.0(10.0)
16.0(10.5)
24
6.0(2.5)
8.0(4.5)
9.5(6.0)
11.5(7.0)
12.5(8.0)
14.0(8.5)
15.0(9.5)
16.0(10.5)
16.5(11.5)
27
6.0(2.5)
8.0(4.5)
10.5(6.0)
12.0(7.0)
13.5(8.0)
14.5(9.0)
16.0(10.5)
17.0(11.0)
17.5(12.0)
30
6.5(2.5)
8.5(4.5)
10.5(6.5)
12.5(7.5)
14.0(8.5)
15.0(9.5)
16.5(10.5)
17.5(11.5)
18.5(12.5)
40
6.5(2.5)
9.5(5.0)
12.0(6.5)
14.0(8.0)
15.5(9.5)
17.5(10.5)
18.5(12.0)
20.0(13.0)
21.0(14.0)
50
7.0(2.5)
10.0(5.0)
13.0(7.0)
15.0(8.5)
17.0(10.0)
19.0(11.0)
20.5(13.0)
23.0(14.0)
23.0(15.0)
60
7.0(2.5)
10.5(5.0)
13.5(7.0)
16.0(9.0)
18.0(10.5)
20.0(12.0)
21.5(13.5)
23.5(14.5)
25.0(16.0)
80
7.0(2.5)
11.0(5.0)
14.5(7.0)
17.0(9.0)
19.5(11.0)
21.5(13.0)
23.5(14.5)
26.0(16.0)
27.5(17.0)
100
7.5(2.5)
11.5(5.0)
15.0(7.5)
18.0(9.5)
21.0(11.5)
23.0(13.5)
25.5(15.0)
28.0(16.5)
30.0(18.0)
120
7.5(2.5)
11.5(5.0)
15.0(7.5)
18.5(9.5)
22.0(11.5)
24.0(13.5)
27.0(15.0)
29.5(17.0)
31.5(18.5)
No limit
7.5(2.5)
12.0(5.0)
15.5(7.5)
19.0(9.5)
22.5(12.0)
25.0(14.0)
28.0(15.5)
30.5(17.0)
34.0(19.0)
134
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 5.4
Permitted unprotected percentages in relation to enclosing rectangles
(Method 3) (cont’d)
Width of
enclosing
rectangle
(m)
Distance from relevant boundary for unprotected percentage not exceeding
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Minimum boundary distance (m) – figures in brackets are for Purpose Groups 1, 2, 3, 5 and 7(b)
Enclosing rectangle 15 m high
3
2.0(1.0)
2.5(1.5)
3.5(2.0)
4.0(2.5)
4.5(2.5)
5.0(3.0)
5.5(3.5)
6.0(3.5)
6.0(4.0)
6
3.0(1.5)
4.5(2.5)
5.5(3.0)
6.0(4.0)
7.0(4.5)
7.5(5.0)
8.0(5.5)
9.0(5.5)
9.0(6.0)
9
4.0(2.0)
5.5(3.0)
6.5(4.0)
7.5(5.0)
8.5(5.5)
9.5(6.0)
10.0(6.5)
11.0(7.0)
11.5(7.5)
12
5.0(2.0)
6.5(3.5)
8.0(5.0)
9.0(5.5)
10.0(6.5)
11.0(7.0)
12.0(8.0)
13.0(8.5)
13.5(9.0)
15
5.5(2.0)
7.0(4.0)
9.0(5.5)
10.0(6.5)
11.5(7.0)
12.5(8.0)
13.5(9.0)
14.5(9.5)
15.0(10.0)
18
6.0(2.5)
8.0(4.5)
9.5(6.0)
11.0(7.0)
12.5(8.0)
13.5(8.5)
14.5(9.5)
15.5(10.5)
16.5(11.0)
21
6.5(2.5)
8.5(5.0)
10.5(6.5)
12.0(7.5)
13.5(8.5)
14.5(9.5)
16.0(10.5)
16.5(11.0)
17.5(12.0)
24
6.5(3.0)
9.0(5.0)
11.0(6.5)
13.0(8.0)
14.5(9.0)
15.5(10.0)
17.0(11.0)
18.0(12.0)
19.0(13.0)
27
7.0(3.0)
9.5(5.5)
11.5(7.0)
13.5(8.5)
15.0(9.5)
16.5(10.5)
18.0(11.5)
19.0(12.5)
20.0(13.5)
30
7.5(3.0)
10.0(5.5)
12.0(7.5)
14.0(8.5)
16.0(10.0)
17.0(11.0)
18.5(12.0)
20.0(13.5)
21.0(14.0)
40
8.0(3.0)
11.0(6.0)
13.5(8.0)
16.0(9.5)
18.0(11.0)
19.5(12.5)
21.0(13.5)
22.5(15.0)
23.5(16.0)
50
8.5(3.5)
12.0(6.0)
15.0(8.5)
17.5(10.0)
19.5(12.0)
21.5(13.5)
23.0(15.0)
25.0(16.5)
26.0(17.5)
60
8.5(3.5)
12.5(6.5)
15.5(8.5)
18.0(10.5)
21.0(12.5)
23.5(14.0)
25.0(15.5)
27.0(17.0)
28.0(18.0)
80
9.0(3.5)
13.5(6.5)
17.0(9.0)
20.0(11.0)
23.0(13.5)
25.5(15.0)
28.0(17.0)
30.0(18.5)
31.5(20.0)
100
9.0(3.5)
14.0(6.5)
18.0(9.0)
21.5(11.5)
24.5(14.0)
27.5(16.0)
30.0(18.0)
32.5(19.5)
34.5(21.5)
120
9.0(3.5)
14.0(6.5)
18.5(9.0)
22.5(11.5)
25.5(14.0)
28.5(16.5)
31.5(18.5)
34.5(20.5)
37.0(22.5)
No limit
9.0(3.5)
14.5(6.5)
19.0(9.0)
23.0(12.0)
27.0(14.5)
30.0(17.0)
34.0(19.0)
36.0(21.0)
39.0(23.0)
Enclosing rectangle 18 m high
3
2.0(1.0)
2.5(1.5)
3.5(2.0)
4.0(2.5)
5.0(2.5)
5.0(3.0)
6.0(3.5)
6.5(4.0)
6.5(4.0)
6
3.5(1.5)
4.5(2.5)
5.5(3.5)
6.5(4.0)
7.5(4.5)
8.0(5.0)
9.0(5.5)
9.5(6.0)
10.0(6.5)
9
4.5(2.0)
6.0(3.5)
7.0(4.5)
8.5(5.0)
9.5(6.0)
10.0(6.5)
11.0(7.0)
12.0(8.0)
12.5(8.5)
12
5.0(2.5)
7.0(4.0)
8.5(5.0)
10.0(6.0)
11.0(7.0)
12.0(7.5)
13.0(8.5)
14.0(9.0)
14.5(10.0)
15
6.0(2.5)
8.0(4.5)
9.5(6.0)
11.0(7.0)
12.5(8.0)
13.5(8.5)
14.5(9.5)
15.5(10.5)
16.5(11.0)
18
6.5(2.5)
8.5(5.0)
11.0(6.5)
12.0(7.5)
13.5(8.5)
14.5(9.5)
16.0(11.0)
17.0(11.5)
18.0(13.0)
21
7.0(3.0)
9.5(5.5)
11.5(7.0)
13.0(8.0)
14.5(9.5)
16.0(10.5)
17.0(11.5)
18.0(12.5)
19.5(13.0)
24
7.5(3.0)
10.0(5.5)
12.0(7.5)
14.0(8.5)
15.5(10.0)
16.5(11.0)
18.5(12.0)
19.5(13.0)
20.5(14.0)
27
8.0(3.5)
10.5(6.0)
12.5(8.0)
14.5(9.0)
16.5(10.5)
17.5(11.5)
19.5(12.5)
20.5(13.5)
21.5(14.5)
30
8.0(3.5)
11.0(6.5)
13.5(8.0)
15.5(9.5)
17.0(11.0)
18.5(12.0)
20.5(13.5)
21.5(14.5)
22.5(15.5)
40
9.0(4.0)
12.0(7.0)
15.0(9.0)
17.5(11.0)
19.5(12.0)
21.5(13.5)
23.5(15.0)
25.0(16.5)
26.0(17.5)
50
9.5(4.0)
13.0(7.0)
16.5(9.5)
19.0(11.5)
21.5(13.0)
23.5(15.0)
26.0(16.5)
27.5(18.0)
29.0(19.0)
60
10.0(4.0)
14.0(7.5)
17.5(10.0)
20.5(12.0)
23.0(14.0)
26.0(16.0)
27.5(17.5)
29.5(19.5)
31.0(20.5)
80
10.0(4.0)
15.0(7.5)
19.0(10.0)
22.5(13.0)
26.0(15.0)
28.5(17.0)
31.0(19.0)
33.5(21.0)
35.0(22.5)
100
10.0(4.0)
16.0(7.5)
20.5(10.0)
24.0(13.5)
28.0(16.0)
31.0(18.0)
33.5(20.5)
36.0(22.5)
38.5(24.0)
120
10.0(4.0)
16.5(7.5)
21.0(10.0)
25.5(14.0)
29.5(16.5)
32.5(19.0)
35.5(21.0)
39.0(23.5)
41.5(25.5)
No limit
10.0(4.0)
17.0(8.0)
22.0(10.0)
26.5(14.0)
30.5(17.0)
34.0(19.5)
37.0(22.0)
41.0(24.0)
43.5(26.5)
135
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 5.4
Permitted unprotected percentages in relation to enclosing rectangles
(Method 3) (cont’d)
Width of
enclosing
rectangle
(m)
Distance from relevant boundary for unprotected percentage not exceeding
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Minimum boundary distance (m) – figures in brackets are for Purpose Groups 1, 2, 3, 5 and 7(b)
Enclosing rectangle 21 m high
3
2.0(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
3.5(2.0)
4.5(2.5)
5.0(3.0)
5.5(3.0)
6.0(3.5)
6.5(4.0)
7.0(4.5)
6
3.5(1.5)
5.0(2.5)
6.0(3.5)
7.0(4.0)
8.0(5.0)
9.0(5.5)
9.5(6.0)
10.0(6.5)
10.5(7.0)
9
4.5(2.0)
6.5(3.5)
7.5(4.5)
9.0(5.5)
10.0(6.5)
11.0(7.0)
12.0(7.5)
13.0(8.5)
13.5(9.0)
12
5.5(2.5)
7.5(4.0)
9.0(5.5)
10.5(6.5)
12.0(7.5)
13.0(8.5)
14.0(9.0)
15.0(10.0)
16.0(10.5)
15
6.5(2.5)
8.5(5.0)
10.5(6.5)
12.0(7.5)
13.5(8.5)
14.5(9.5)
16.0(10.5)
16.5(11.0)
17.5(12.0)
18
7.0(3.0)
9.5(5.5)
11.5(7.0)
13.0(8.0)
14.5(9.5)
16.0(10.5)
17.0(11.5)
18.0(12.5)
19.5(13.0)
21
7.5(3.0)
10.0(6.0)
12.5(7.5)
14.0(9.0)
15.5(10.0)
17.0(11.0)
18.5(12.5)
20.0(13.5)
21.0(14.0)
24
8.0(3.5)
10.5(6.0)
13.0(8.0)
15.0(9.5)
16.5(10.5)
18.0(12.0)
20.0(13.0)
21.0(14.0)
22.0(15.0)
27
8.5(3.5)
11.5(6.5)
14.0(8.5)
16.0(10.0)
18.0(11.5)
19.0(13.0)
21.0(14.0)
22.5(15.0)
23.5(16.0)
30
9.0(4.0)
12.0(7.0)
14.5(9.0)
16.5(10.5)
18.5(12.0)
20.5(13.0)
22.0(14.5)
23.5(16.0)
25.0(16.5)
40
10.0(4.5)
13.5(7.5)
16.5(10.0)
19.0(12.0)
21.5(13.5)
23.0(15.0)
25.5(16.5)
27.0(18.0)
28.5(19.0)
50
11.0(4.5)
14.5(8.0)
18.0(11.0)
21.0(13.0)
23.5(14.5)
25.5(16.5)
28.0(18.0)
30.0(20.0)
31.5(21.0)
60
11.5(4.5)
15.5(8.5)
19.5(11.5)
22.5(13.5)
25.5(15.5)
28.0(17.5)
30.5(19.5)
32.5(21.0)
33.5(22.5)
80
12.0(4.5)
17.0(8.5)
21.0(12.0)
25.0(14.5)
28.5(17.0)
31.5(19.0)
34.0(21.0)
36.5(23.5)
38.5(25.0)
100
12.0(4.5)
18.0(9.0)
22.5(12.0)
27.0(15.5)
31.0(18.0)
34.5(20.5)
37.0(22.5)
40.0(25.0)
42.0(27.0)
120
12.0(4.5)
18.5(9.0)
23.5(12.0)
28.5(16.0)
32.5(18.5)
36.5(21.5)
39.5(23.5)
43.0(26.5)
45.5(28.5)
No limit
12.0(4.5)
19.0(9.0)
25.0(12.0)
29.5(16.0)
34.5(19.0)
38.0(22.0)
41.5(25.0)
45.5(26.5)
48.0(29.5)
Enclosing rectangle 24 m high
3
2.0(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
3.5(2.0)
4.5(2.5)
5.0(3.0)
5.5(3.5)
6.0(3.5)
7.0(4.0)
7.5(4.5)
6
3.5(1.5)
5.0(2.5)
6.0(3.5)
7.0(4.5)
8.5(5.0)
9.5(5.5)
10.0(6.0)
10.5(7.0)
11.0(7.0)
9
5.0(2.0)
6.5(3.5)
8.0(5.0)
9.5(5.5)
11.0(6.5)
12.0(7.5)
13.0(8.0)
13.5(9.0)
14.5(9.5)
12
6.0(2.5)
8.0(4.5)
9.5(6.0)
11.5(7.0)
12.5(8.0)
14.0(8.5)
15.0(9.5)
16.0(10.5)
16.5(11.5)
15
6.5(3.0)
9.0(5.0)
11.0(6.5)
13.0(8.0)
14.5(9.0)
15.5(10.0)
17.0(11.0)
18.0(12.0)
19.0(13.0)
18
7.5(3.0)
10.0(5.5)
12.0(7.5)
14.0(8.5)
15.5(10.0)
16.5(11.0)
18.5(12.0)
19.5(13.0)
20.5(14.0)
21
8.0(3.5)
10.5(6.0)
13.0(8.0)
15.0(9.5)
16.5(10.5)
18.0(12.0)
20.0(13.0)
21.0(14.0)
22.0(15.0)
24
8.5(3.5)
11.5(6.5)
14.0(8.5)
16.0(10.0)
18.0(11.5)
19.5(12.5)
21.0(14.0)
22.5(15.0)
24.0(16.0)
27
9.0(4.0)
12.5(7.0)
15.0(9.0)
17.0(11.0)
19.0(12.5)
20.5(13.5)
22.5(15.0)
24.0(16.0)
25.5(17.0)
30
9.5(4.0)
13.0(7.5)
15.5(9.5)
18.0(11.5)
20.0(13.0)
21.5(14.0)
23.5(15.5)
25.0(17.0)
26.5(18.0)
40
11.0(4.5)
14.5(8.5)
18.0(11.0)
20.5(13.0)
23.0(14.5)
25.0(16.0)
27.5(18.0)
29.0(19.0)
30.5(20.5)
50
12.0(5.0)
16.0(9.0)
19.5(12.0)
22.5(14.0)
25.5(16.0)
27.5(17.5)
30.0(19.5)
32.0(21.0)
33.5(22.5)
60
12.5(5.0)
17.0(9.5)
21.0(12.5)
24.5(15.0)
27.5(17.0)
30.0(19.0)
32.5(21.0)
35.0(23.0)
36.5(24.5)
80
13.5(5.0)
18.5(10.0)
23.5(13.5)
27.5(16.5)
31.0(18.5)
34.5(21.0)
37.0(23.5)
39.5(25.5)
41.5(27.5)
100
13.5(5.0)
20.0(10.0)
25.0(13.5)
29.5(17.0)
33.5(20.0)
37.0(22.5)
40.0(25.0)
43.0(27.5)
45.5(29.5)
120
13.5(5.5)
20.5(10.0)
26.5(13.5)
31.0(17.5)
36.0(20.5)
39.5(23.5)
43.0(26.5)
46.5(29.0)
49.0(31.0)
No limit
13.5(5.5)
21.0(10.0)
27.5(13.5)
32.5(18.0)
37.5(21.0)
42.0(24.0)
45.5(27.5)
49.5(30.0)
52.0(32.5)
136
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 5.4
Permitted unprotected percentages in relation to enclosing rectangles
(Method 3) (cont’d)
Width of
enclosing
rectangle
(m)
Distance from relevant boundary for unprotected percentage not exceeding
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Minimum boundary distance (m) – figures in brackets are for Purpose Groups 1, 2, 3, 5 and 7(b)
Enclosing rectangle 27 m high
3
2.0(1.0)
3.0(1.5)
4.0(2.0)
4.5(2.5)
5.5(3.0)
6.0(3.5)
6.5(4.0)
7.0(4.0)
7.5(4.5)
6
3.5(1.5)
5.0(2.5)
6.5(3.5)
7.5(4.5)
8.5(5.0)
9.5(6.0)
10.5(6.5)
11.0(7.0)
12.0(7.5)
9
5.0(2.0)
7.0(3.5)
8.5(5.0)
10.0(6.0)
11.5(7.0)
12.5(7.5)
13.5(8.5)
14.5(9.5)
15.0(10.0)
12
6.0(2.5)
8.0(4.5)
10.5(6.0)
12.0(7.0)
13.5(8.0)
14.5(9.0)
16.0(10.5)
17.0(11.0)
17.5(12.0)
15
7.0(3.0)
9.5(5.5)
11.5(7.0)
13.5(8.5)
15.0(9.5)
16.5(10.5)
18.0(11.5)
19.0(12.5)
20.0(13.5)
18
8.0(3.5)
10.5(6.0)
12.5(8.0)
14.5(9.0)
16.5(10.5)
17.5(11.5)
19.5(12.5)
20.5(13.5)
21.5(14.5)
21
8.5(3.5)
11.5(6.5)
14.0(8.5)
16.0(10.0)
18.0(11.5)
19.0(13.0)
21.0(14.0)
22.5(15.0)
23.5(16.0)
24
9.0(3.5)
12.5(7.0)
15.0(9.0)
17.0(11.0)
19.0(12.5)
20.5(13.5)
22.5(15.0)
24.0(16.0)
25.5(17.0)
27
10.0(4.0)
13.0(7.5)
16.0(10.0)
18.0(11.5)
20.0(13.0)
22.0(14.0)
24.0(16.0)
25.5(17.0)
27.0(18.0)
30
10.0(4.0)
13.5(8.0)
17.0(10.0)
19.0(12.0)
21.0(13.5)
23.0(15.0)
25.0(17.0)
26.5(18.0)
28.0(19.0)
40
11.5(5.0)
15.5(9.0)
19.0(11.5)
22.0(14.0)
24.5(15.5)
26.5(17.5)
29.0(19.0)
30.5(20.5)
32.5(22.0)
50
12.5(5.5)
17.0(9.5)
21.0(12.5)
24.0(15.0)
27.0(17.0)
29.5(19.0)
32.0(21.0)
34.5(22.5)
36.0(24.0)
60
13.5(5.5)
18.5(10.5)
22.5(13.5)
26.5(16.0)
29.5(18.5)
32.0(20.5)
35.0(22.5)
37.0(24.5)
39.0(26.5)
80
14.5(6.0)
20.5(11.0)
25.0(14.5)
29.5(17.5)
33.0(20.5)
36.5(22.5)
39.5(25.0)
42.0(27.5)
44.0(29.5)
100
15.5(6.0)
21.5(11.0)
27.0(15.5)
32.0(19.0)
36.5(21.5)
40.5(24.5)
43.0(27.0)
46.5(30.0)
48.5(32.0)
120
15.5(6.0)
22.5(11.5)
28.5(15.5)
34.0(19.5)
39.0(22.5)
43.0(26.0)
46.5(28.5)
50.5(32.0)
53.0(34.0)
No limit
15.5(6.0)
23.5(11.5)
29.5(15.5)
35.0(20.0)
40.5(23.5)
44.5(27.0)
48.5(29.5)
52.0(33.0)
55.5(35.0)
137
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Method 4 (Aggregate notional area)
5.19
This method can be used for a building or compartment of any purpose
group. A building or compartment should be so situated that the aggregate
notional area of the unprotected areas in the side of the building or
compartment does not exceed, in the case of –
(a) a building or compartment of Purpose Group 1, 2, 3, 5 or 7(b) –
210 m2; or
(b) a building or compartment of any other purpose group – 90 m2,
when calculated from any vertical datum on its relevant boundary.
The aggregate notional area is the aggregate of the areas of unprotected
area in the side of the building or compartment, each such unprotected area
being multiplied by the Factor given in Table 5.5 relative to the distance the
unprotected area is from the vertical datum.
A vertical datum is a vertical line of unlimited height at any point on the
relevant boundary and the datum line is the line joining the vertical datum to
the nearest point on the side of the building or compartment.
When calculating the aggregate notional area no account should be taken of
any unprotected area which is –
(i)
screened from the vertical datum by any part of an external wall which
is not an unprotected area;
(ii) outside a horizontal area centred on the vertical datum, having a
radius of 50 m and extending 90° on either side of the datum line;
(iii) facing away from the vertical datum; or
(iv) making an angle of less than 10° with a line drawn from it to the
vertical datum.
Table 5.5
Multiplication factors for determining
aggregate notional areas (Method 4)
Distance of unprotected area
from vertical datum (m)
Factor
Not less than
Less than
1.0
1.2
80
1.2
1.8
40
1.8
2.7
20
2.7
4.3
10
4.3
6.0
4
6.0
8.5
2
8.5
12.0
1
12.0
18.5
0.5
18.5
27.5
0.25
27.5
50.0
0.1
50.0
No limit
0
138
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Canopies
5.20
The high degree of ventilation and heat dissipation achieved by open sided
canopies means that the space separation required by paragraph 5.13 may
be onerous.
The provisions of paragraph 5.13 should not apply to –
(a) a free standing single storey, open sided canopy, constructed of non-
combustible materials, which is not less than 1 m from its relevant
boundaries; and
(b) a covered way, covered yard or a carport, which is open on two or
more sides and is not more than 40 m2 in area.
When determining the separation distance an attached single storey canopy
which is not less than 2 m from its relevant boundaries and open on all sides
other than the attached side may be discounted (see Diagram 5.5).
The provisions regarding roof coverings and roof separation distances
should apply (see paragraph 5.21 to 5.26).
Diagram 5.5
The effect of an attached canopy
on separation distance
see para 5.20
not less than 2 m
open 
canopy
relevant 
boundary
side of 
building
separation distance determined 
from side of building and not 
canopy
Section
139
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Roofs
Roof covering designations (National tests)
5.21
The designation of a roof covering in respect of external fire exposure
should be determined by testing in accordance with BS 476: Part 3 and
expressed by two letters in the range A to D with an AA classification being
the best. The first letter indicates the time to penetration and the second
letter indicates a measure of the spread of flame.The notional designations
of some generic roof coverings are given in Table 5.6.
Note – The National classifications do not automatically equate with the
equivalent European classifications, therefore products cannot typically
assume a European class unless they have been tested accordingly.
Roof covering designations (European tests)
5.22
Performance in terms of the resistance of roofs to external fire exposure is
determined by reference to Commission Decision 2005/823/EC amending
Decision 2001/671/EC establishing a classification system for the external
fire performance of roofs and roof coverings.
Constructions are classified within the European system as BROOF(t4),
CROOF(t4), DROOF(t4), EROOF(t4) or FROOF(t4) in accordance with
BS EN 13501-5: Fire classification of construction products and building
elements: Classification using data from external fire exposure to roof tests.
With BROOF(t4) being the highest performance and FROOF(t4) being the
lowest.
BS EN 13501-5 refers to four separate tests. The suffix (t4) used above
indicates that test4 is to be used for the purposes of this Technical Booklet.
5.23
Where a thermoplastic material cannot be given a designation when tested
to BS 476: Part 3 it may be used as a rooflight provided that it can be
classified under paragraph 3.5 and is used in accordance with paragraph
5.25. Where unwired glass, not less than 4 mm thick, is used in a rooflight it
should be regarded as having an AA (National class) or BROOF(t4)
(European class) designation.
140
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 5.6
Notional designations of roof coverings
Part I – Pitched roofs covered with slates or tiles
Covering material
Supporting structure
Designation
1
Natural slates
2
Fibre reinforced
cement sheets
3
Clay tiles
4
Concrete tiles
Timber rafters with or without
underfelt, sarking, boarding,
wood wool slabs, compressed
straw slabs, plywood, wood
chipboard or fibre insulating
board
AA (National class) or
BROOF(t4) (European
class)
Notes:
Although this Table does not include guidance on pitched roofs covered with bitumen felt, it should be noted
that there is a wide range of materials on the market and information on specific products is readily available
from manufacturers.
Part II – Pitched roofs covered with self-supporting sheets
Details of covering
Supporting
structure
Designation
Material
Construction
1
Profiled sheets of –
Single skin without
underlay or with
underlay of –
Structure of
timber, steel
or concrete
AA (National class) or
BROOF(t4) (European
class)
(i)
galvanised steel;
(ii)
aluminium;
(i)
plasterboard;
(iii)
fibre reinforced
cement; or
(ii)
fibre
insulating
board; or
(iv)
prepainted (coil
coated) steel or
aluminium with a
PVC or PVF2
coating
(iii)
wood wool
slab
2
Profiled sheets of –
Double skin without
interlayer or with
interlayer of –
Structure of
timber, steel
or concrete
AA (National class) or
BROOF(t4) (European
class)
(i)
galvanised steel;
(ii)
aluminium;
(i)
resin-bonded
glass fibre;
(iii)
fibre reinforced
cement; or
(ii)
mineral wool
slab;
(iv)
prepainted (coil
coated) steel or
aluminium with a
PVC or PVF2
coating
(iii)
polystyrene; or
(iv)
polyurethane
141
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 5.6
Notional designations of roof coverings (contd)
Part III – Pitched or flat roofs covered with fully supported material
Details of covering
Designation
Covering material
Supporting structure
1
Aluminium sheet
Timber joists and –
AA*(National class) or
BROOF(t4) (European class)
2
Copper sheet
(i)
tongued and grooved
boarding; or
3
Zinc sheet
(ii)
plain edged boarding
4
Lead sheet
5
Mastic asphalt
Steel or timber joists with
deck of–
AA (National class) or
BROOF(t4) (European class)
6
Vitreous enamelled
steel sheet
(i)
wood wool slab;
(ii)
compressed straw slab;
(iii)
wood chipboard;
(iv)
fibre insulating board; or
(v)
9.5 mm plywood
7
Lead/tin alloy
coated steel sheet
8
Zinc/aluminium
alloy coated steel
sheet
Concrete or clay pot slab (cast
in situ or precast), or non-
combustible deck of steel,
aluminium or fibre reinforced cement
(with or without insulation)
AA (National class) or
BROOF(t4) (European class)
9
Pre-painted (coil
coated) steel sheet
including liquid-
applied PVC coatings
Note:
*
Lead sheet supported by timber joists and plain edge boarding should be deemed to be of designation BA (National
class) or CROOF(t4) (European class).
Part IV – Flat roofs covered with bitumen felt
A flat roof comprising a covering of bitumen felt should (irrespective of the felt specification) be deemed to be of
designation AA (National class) or BROOF(t4) (European class) if the felt is laid on a deck constructed of 6 mm
plywood, 12.5 mm wood chipboard, 16 mm (finished) plain edged timber boarding, compressed straw slab,
screeded wood wool slab, profiled fibre reinforced cement of steel deck (single or double skin) with or without fibre
insulating board overlay, or concrete or clay pot slab (insitu or pre cast) and has a surface finish of –
(a)
bitumen bedded stone chippings covering the whole surface to a depth of not less than 12.5 mm;
(b)
bitumen bedded tiles of a non-combustible material;
(c)
sand and cement screed; or
(d)
macadam.
142
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Space separation - roofs
5.24
The minimum distance from any part of a roof, other than a plastic rooflight,
to a relevant boundary (see paragraph 5.9) should be not less than that
given in Table 5.7 for the relevant designation of roof covering. There are no
restrictions on the use of roof coverings designated AA, AB or AC (National
class) or BROOF(t4) (European class). In addition, roof covering products
(and/or materials) as defined in Commission Decision 2000/553/EC
implementing Council Directive 89/106/EEC as regards the external fire
performance of roof coverings can be considered to fulfil all of the
requirements for performance characteristic “external fire performance”
without the need for testing provided that any national provisions on the
design and execution of works are fulfilled. That is, the roof covering
products (and/or materials) defined in this Commission Decision can be
used without restriction.
The boundary formed by the compartment wall separating semi-detached
dwellinghouses should be disregarded for the purposes of this paragraph.
Table 5.7
Limitations on roof coverings
Designation of covering of
roof or part of roof
Minimum distance from any point on
relevant boundary
Less than
6 m
Not less
than 6 m
Not less
than 12 m
Not less
than 20 m
National Class
European Class
AA, AB or AC
BROOF(t4)




BA, BB or BC
CROOF(t4)
X



CA, CB or CC
DROOF(t4)
X
 (1)(2)
 (1)

AD, BD or CD
EROOF(t4)
X
 (1)(2)
 (1)
 (1)
DA, DB, DC or DD
FROOF(t4)
X
X
X
 (1)(2)
Notes:

Acceptable.
X
Not acceptable.
(1) Not acceptable on any of the following buildings –
(i) a dwellinghouse in a terrace of three or more dwellinghouses;
(ii) a building of Purpose Group 6 or 7 of any size; and
(iii) a building of any other purpose group with a cubic capicity greater than 1500 m³.
(2) Acceptable on buildings not listed in Note 1 but only where that part of the roof is –
(i) not more than 3 m² in area;
(ii) not less than 1.5 m from any similar part; and
(iii) the roof covering between any such parts is a material of limited combustibility.
143
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

5.25
Where a roof incorporates a plastic rooflight, which is not designated AA,
AB, AC, BA, BB or BC (National class), or BROOF(t4) or CROOF(t4)
(European class), the minimum distance from that rooflight to a relevant
boundary should be not less than that given in Tables 5.8 and 5.9 for the
appropriate classification of the rooflight and the space over which it is
located.
For the purposes of this paragraph and Tables 5.8 and 5.9 a rigid
thermoplastic rooflight, made from polycarbonate or unplasticised PVC,
which achieves a Class 1 classification for surface spread of flame (see
paragraph 3.4) may be regarded as having an AA (National class) or
BROOF(t4) (European class) designation (other than for the purposes of
paragraph 4.21(a) and Diagram 4.2).
5.26
Thatch or wood shingles should be regarded as having an AD, BD or CD
(National class) or EROOF(t4) (European class) designation in Table 5.7
where performance under BS 476: Part 3 or ENV 1187, test4 cannot be
established.
Table 5.8
Plastic rooflights – Limitations on use and boundary distance
Minimum
classification
on lower
surface (1)
Space which rooflight can serve
Minimum distance (m) from any point on relevant
boundary to rooflight with an external surface
classification of
AD, BD,CD (National class) or
DA, DB, DC, DD
(National class) or
EROOF(t4) (European class)
CA, CB, CC, (National class)
FROOF(t4) (European class)
or DROOF(t4) (European class)
Class 3
(National
class) or
Class D-s3,d2
(European
class)
(a)
Balcony, verandah, carport,
covered way or loading bay
which has at least one longer
side wholly or permanently open
(b)
Detached swimming pool
(c)
Conservatory, garage or
outbuilding, with a maximum floor
area of 40 m2
6
20
(d)
Circulation space(3) (except a
protected stairway)
(e)
Room(3)
6(2)
20(2)
Notes:
(1) As required by paragraph 3.14.
(2) The rooflight should also comply with Diagram 5.6.
(3) Single skin rooflight only, in the case of non-thermoplastic materials.
Rooflights may have upper and lower surfaces with different properties if they have double skins or are laminates of
different materials – in which case the more onerous distance applies.
Where paragraph 4.21(a) applies rooflights should be at least 1.5 m from the compartment wall.
144
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table 5.9
TP(a) and TP(b) plastic rooflights – Limitations on use and boundary distance
Minimum
classification
on lower
surface (1)
Space which rooflight can serve
Minimum distance (m) from any point on relevant
boundary to rooflight with an external surface
classification of
TP(a)
TP(b)
1
TP(a) rigid
Any space except a protected stairway
6(2)
Not applicable
2
TP(b)
(a)
Balcony, verandah, carport,
covered way or loading bay which
has at least one longer side wholly
or permanently open
(b)
Detached swimming pool
(c)
Conservatory, garage or
outbuilding, with a maximum floor
area of 40 m2
Not applicable
6
(d)
Circulation space(4) (except a
protected stairway)
(e)
Room(4)
Not applicable
6(3)
Notes:
(1) As required by paragraph 3.14.
(2) No limit in the case of any space described in items 2(a), (b) and (c).
(3) The rooflight should also comply with Diagram 5.6.
(4) Single skin rooflight only, in the case of non-thermoplastic materials.
Rooflights may have upper and lower surfaces with different properties if they have double skins or are laminates of
different materials – in which case the more onerous distance applies.
Where paragraph 4.21(a) applies rooflights should be at least 1.5 m from the compartment wall.
145
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 5.6
Limitation on areas and spacing of certain
thermoplastic rooflights
see Table 5.8 note (2), Table 5.9 note (3)
rooflight *
max. area 5 m2
3 m** minimum between
any two rooflights
in any direction
rooflight *
max. area 5 m2
Notes:
*
Or group of rooflights amounting to not 
more than 5 m2 .
** Class 3 (National class) or Class  
 
D-s3,d2 (European class) rooflights
to rooms in non-residential purpose  
 
groups may be spaced 1.8 m apart  
 
provided that the rooflights are evenly  
 
distributed and do not exceed 20%  
 
of the floor area of the room.
1
Surrounding roof covering to be a 
material of limited combustibility for at 
least 3 m distance.
2
Where paragraph 4.21(a) applies 
rooflights should be not less than 1.5 m 
from the compartment wall.
146
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Section 6
Facilities and access for the
Fire and Rescue Service
6.1
This Section contains provisions to ensure that there is –
(a) sufficient means of access to and within a building for firefighting
personnel to effect rescue and fight fire;
(b) sufficient facilities to assist firefighters in their tasks;
(c) adequate means of venting smoke from a fire in a basement; and
(d) adequate external access to enable firefighting appliances to be
brought near to a building for effective use.
Firefighting shafts
6.2
In low rise buildings without deep basements fire and rescue personnel
access requirements will be met by a combination of the normal means of
escape in the building and the measures for vehicle access in accordance
with paragraphs 6.19 and 6.20. In other buildings including high rise
buildings and those with deep basements the problems of reaching the fire
and working inside the building near the fire, necessitate the provision of
additional facilities to avoid delay and to provide a sufficiently secure
operating base to allow effective action to be taken. These additional
facilities include firefighting lifts, firefighting stairs and firefighting lobbies
which are combined in a protected shaft known as a firefighting shaft.
6.3
A shopping complex should be provided with firefighting shafts in
accordance with the recommendations of BS 5588-10 Section 3. Any other
building should be provided with a firefighting shaft or shafts, to serve all
storeys, where –
(a) it has a storey more than 18 m above fire and rescue access level;
(b) it is a building of Purpose Group 4, 6 or 7(a) and has a storey 900 m2
or more in area at a height of 7.5 m or more above fire and rescue
access level;
(c) it has a storey more than 10 m below fire and rescue access level; or
(d) it has two or more basement storeys any of which is 900 m2 or more in
area.
However, a firefighting shaft provided under (a) or (b) need not serve a
basement storey unless (c) or (d) applies and similarly a firefighting shaft
provided under (c) or (d) need not serve an upper storey unless (a) or (b)
applies.
Diagram 6.1 illustrates the provisions of this paragraph.
147
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 6.1
Provision of firefighting shafts
see para 6.3
building of Purpose
Group 4, 6 or 7(a)
storey 900 m2 or more
in area
firefighting
shaft
more than
18 m
firefighting
shaft
more than
7.5 m
fire and rescue *
access level
fire and rescue *
access level
Case (a)
Case (b)
fire and
rescue *
access
level
fire and rescue *
access level
firefighting
shaft
more than
10 m
firefighting
shaft
two or more basement storeys any
of which is 900 m2 or more in area
Case (c)
Case (d)
Notes:
* When measuring the height to an upper storey the highest level at which the Fire and Rescue
Service can gain access should be used and similarly when measuring the depth of a basement
storey the lowest level should be used.
1. In cases (a) and (c) the firefighting shaft should include a firefighting lift.
148
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

6.4
Where a building is to be provided with firefighting shafts the minimum
number (subject to paragraph 6.5) should be –
(a) where a building is fitted throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system complying with the relevant recommendations of BS 5306-2 or
BS EN 12845 as given in Table 6.1 for the appropriate floor area; or
(b) where a building is not fitted throughout with such a sprinkler system –
at least one for every 900 m2, (or part thereof) of floor area of the
largest storey given in paragraph 6.3(a) to (d) as appropriate.
6.5
Firefighting shafts should be located so that every part of every storey (other
than fire and rescue access level) is not more than 60 m from a fire main
outlet, measured on a route suitable for laying a fire hose (hose route).
Where the internal layout is unknown every part of every such storey should
be not more than 40 m, in a direct line, from a fire main outlet.
6.6
Firefighting shafts should be designed and constructed in accordance with
the relevant recommendations of BS 5588-5.
Where a building falls within paragraph 6.3(a) or (c) all firefighting shafts
should have a firefighting lift complying with the relevant recommendations
of BS 5588-5. A firefighting lift installation includes the lift car itself, the lift
well and the lift machinery space, together with the lift communication
system. The firefighting lift installation should conform with BS EN 81-1 or
BS EN 81-2 as appropriate for the particular type of lift and BS EN 81-72.
However, in a Purpose Group 1(a) (flat) building it is not necessary for a
firefighting shaft to have firefighting lobbies provided that –
(a) the firefighting stair opens directly into a protected lobby or protected
corridor provided for means of escape; and
(b) where the firefighting shaft has a firefighting lift – the lift opens directly
into a protected lobby or protected corridor provided for means of
escape and the lift landing doors are not more than 7.5 m from the
door to the firefighting stair.
Table 6.1
Minimum number of firefighting shafts
in a building fitted with a sprinkler system
Floor area of
the largest
storey (m2)
Minimum number of
firefighting shafts
Less than 900
1
900 to 2000
2
Over 2000
2 plus 1 for every 1500 m2
or part thereof of floor area
149
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Fire mains
6.7
Fire mains are installed in a building and equipped with valves, etc., so that
the Fire and Rescue Service may connect hoses for water to fight fires
inside the building. Rising fire mains serve floors above ground, or upwards
from the level at which the Fire and Rescue Service gain access (called the
fire and rescue access level) if this is not ground level. Falling mains serve
levels below fire and rescue access level.
Fire mains may be of the dry type which are normally empty and are
supplied through hose from a fire and rescue pumping appliance.
Alternatively, they may be of the wet type where they are kept full of water
and supplied from tanks and pumps in the building. There should be a
facility to allow a wet system to be replenished from a pumping appliance in
an emergency.
6.8
A firefighting shaft should be provided with –
(a) a wet fire main where it has a storey more than 60 m above fire and
rescue access level; or
(b) a wet or a dry fire main in any other case.
6.9
The fire main should be located in the firefighting lobbies of the firefighting
shaft and should have an outlet connection and valve at every level other
than at fire and rescue access level. However, where firefighting lobbies are
not provided in a Purpose Group 1(a) building the fire main should be
located in the firefighting stairway.
6.10
The design and construction of a fire main should be in accordance with the
relevant recommendations of BS 9990.
Provisions for vehicle access are given in paragraph 6.19.
Venting of heat and smoke from basements
6.11
The build-up of smoke and heat as a result of a fire can seriously inhibit the
ability of the Fire and Rescue Service to carry out rescue and firefighting
operatons in a basement. The problem can be reduced by providing venting
facilities to make conditions tenable by providing a route for smoke and heat
to escape to the open air from the basement level. These facilities can also
be used by the Fire and Rescue Service to let cooler air into the basement.
6.12
Venting facilities, connected directly to the external air, should be provided
from every basement storey other than –
(a) a basement in a building of Purpose Group 1(b) or (c);
(b) a basement storey which –
(i)
has a floor area not more than 200 m2; or
(ii) has a floor not more than 3 m below the lowest adjacent ground
level;
(c) a basement storey used for car parking and ventilated in accordance
with paragraph 4.50; and
(d) a basement storey or that part of a basement storey used as a strong
room.
150
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

6.13
Where basements have external doors or windows, the compartments
containing the rooms with these doors or windows do not need smoke
outlets. It is common for basements to be open to the air on one or more
elevations. This may be the result of different ground levels on different
sides of the building.
Natural venting
6.14
A basement storey may be ventilated by smoke outlets which should –
(a) be sited at ceiling level within the space they serve;
(b) have an aggregate free area of not less than 2.5% of the floor area of
the space they serve;
(c) be distributed as evenly as possible around the perimeter of the
building;
(d) be located so that they do not adversely affect any escape route from
the building; and
(e) have a sign stating “smoke outlet from basement” fixed adjacent to
each external outlet point.
The smoke outlets from a place of special fire hazard should be separate
from the smoke outlets from other areas.
6.15
Smoke outlets may discharge by means of windows, stall-board risers or
pavement lights which can be opened or knocked out provided such covers
are readily accessible to the Fire and Rescue Service.
Shafts enclosing smoke outlets should be of smoke tight non-combustible
construction and have the same period of fire resistance as that for
elements of structure in the basement storey served.
Shafts from different parts of the same basement storey, or from different
basement storeys, should be separated by smoke tight non-combustible
fire-resisting construction.
Mechanical venting
6.16
A basement may be ventilated by a mechanical air extraction system
provided –
(a) the basement has a sprinkler system complying with the relevant
recommendations of BS 5306-2 or BS EN 12845; and
(b) the air extraction system has a capacity of not less than 10 air
changes per hour and is capable of operating at a temperature of
300°C for not less than 60 minutes.
The air extraction system should come into operation automatically on
the activation of either –
(i)
the sprinkler system; or
(ii) the fire detection and fire alarm system in the basement where
this system complies with BS 5839-1, of at least Category L3
standard.
151
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Rolling shutters in compartment walls
6.17
A rolling shutter in a compartment wall should be provided with a suitable
operating mechanism so that it can be opened and closed manually by the
Fire and Rescue Service.
Vehicle access
6.18
For the purposes of this Section vehicle access to the exterior of a building
is needed to enable high reach appliances, such as turntable ladders and
hydraulic platforms to be used, and to enable pumping appliances to supply
water and equipment for firefighting and rescue purposes.
6.19
The provisions for vehicle access are related to whether or not the building
has a fire main or mains and, where it does not, to the size and height of the
building. Where a building –
(a) does not have a fire main and is a block of flats, access for a pump
appliance should be provided to within 45 m (hose route) of each door
giving access to each individual dwelling;
(b) does not have a fire main, is not a block of flats and is less than
2000 m2 in area and the height to the top storey is less than 11 m,
access for a pump appliance should be –
(i)
provided to within 45 m (hose route) of the building other than
for a dwellinghouse where the 45 m should be to a door giving
access to the interior; or
(ii) provided to 15% of the perimeter;
(c) does not have a fire main and is other than as described in (a) and (b),
access should be provided in accordance with Table 6.2;
(d) has dry fire mains, access for a pumping appliance should be provided
to within 18 m, and within sight of, each fire main inlet connection
point; and
(e) has wet fire mains, access for a pumping appliance should be
provided to within 18 m, and within sight of the emergency
replenishment inlet of the tank serving each fire main.
In every elevation to which fire and rescue access is provided, there should
be a door not less than 750 mm wide, giving access to the interior of the
building. Where fire mains are provided a door should give access to each
fire main.
[Note – the Building Regulations cannot impose requirements for work to be
done beyond the boundary of the premises.]
Vehicle access routes and vehicular hardstandings areas
6.20
A vehicle access route and vehicular hardstanding area should be designed
and constructed to the standards given in Table 6.3 and, in the case of those
for high reach appliances, the dimensions shown in Diagram 6.2.
Where the height of the top storey of a building is more than 11 m above the
level of the adjoining ground the vehicle access route and the vehicular
hardstanding area should be suitable for a high reach appliance. For lower
buildings a vehicle access route should be suitable for a pump appliance.
152
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

6.21
A turning facility should be provided in a dead end vehicle access route
which is more than 20 m in length. This should be a hammerhead or turning
circle –
(a) designed on the basis of the dimensions given in Table 6.3; and
(b) located so that vehicles do not have to reverse more than 20 m.
Vehicular hardstanding areas should be as level as possible and should not
exceed a gradient of 1 in 12.
Table 6.2
Fire and rescue vehicle access to buildings not fitted with fire mains
Height to top
storey(1)
Area of building
(m2)
Provide vehicle access to
Type of appliance
(m)
Up to 2000
Up to 11
Over 11
See paragraph 6.19(b)
15% of perimeter(2)
Pump
High reach
2000-8000
Up to 11
Over 11
15% of perimeter(2)
Pump
High reach
50% of perimeter(2)
8000-16000
Up to 11
Over 11
50% of perimeter(2)
Pump
High reach
50% of perimeter(2)
16000-24000
Up to 11
Over 11
75% of perimeter(2)
Pump
High reach
75% of perimeter(2)
Over 24000
Up to 11
Over 11
100% of perimeter(2)
Pump
High reach
100% of perimeter(2)
Notes:
(1) For Purpose Group 7(a) buildings the height should be measured to the mean roof level.
(2) The perimeter is the aggregate plan perimeter found by vertical projection onto a horizontal ground plane excluding
walls separating buildings.
Table 6.3
Fire and rescue vehicle access routes
Minimum
width
of road
between
kerbs (m)
Minimum
width
of
gateways
(m)
Minimum
turning
circle
between
kerbs (m)
Minimum
turning
circle
between
walls (m)
Minimum
clearance
height (m)
Minimum
carrying
capacity
(tonnes)
Appliance
type
Pump
3.7
3.1
16.8
19.2
3.7
12.5
High reach
3.7
3.1
26.0
29.0
4.0
17.0
153
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram 6.2
Relationship between a building and a vehicle access route or a
vehicular hardstanding area for a high reach appliance
see para 6.20
overhead obstruction to be
avoided in this zone
C
B
A
obstruction
vehicle hardstanding area
face of building at ground level or 
vertical plane of projecting upper 
storey
Type of appliance
Dimensions
Hydraulic
platform (m)
Turntable
ladder (m)
A maximum distance* to near edge
of vehicle hardstanding area
2.0
4.9
B minimum distance to farthest edge of
7.5
10.0
vehicle hardstanding area
9.7
10.0
C minimum width of unobstructed space
Note:
*
The hardstanding may extend closer to the building but any such
 
extension should not be considered as a vehicle hardstanding area.
154
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Appendix A
Purpose Groups
A.1
The provisions of this Section should apply when using Sections 2 to 6 of
this Technical Booklet.
Purpose groups
A.2
As many of the provisions in this Technical Booklet are related to the use of
a building or compartment it is necessary to classify each building and
compartment, according to its use, into a purpose group.
A building may have a single use or it may have many uses.
Sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) describe the circumstances where it is
appropriate to treat a different use as a purpose group in its own right. (Note
that the provisions of paragraph 4.17 require compartmentation between
different purpose groups.)
Every building and compartment should be classified according to its use, or
intended use, into the most appropriate of those purpose groups given in
Table A.1 and –
(a) where the use of a building or compartment will vary from time to time,
it should be classified as the purpose group to which the more or most
onerous provisions in Section 4 apply;
(b) where a building or compartment has one or more uses which are not
ancillary to the main use of that building or compartment, each portion
given over to a separate use should be classified separately; and
(c) where the building or compartment has one or more uses which are
ancillary to the main use of that building or compartment, each portion
given over to an ancillary use should be classified separately when –
(i)
it is a flat;
(ii) in a Purpose Group 4 building or compartment more than
280 m2 in floor area – it is storage occupying more than one
third of the total floor area of the building or compartment; or
(iii) in a building or compartment of any purpose group more than
280 m2 in floor area – it is a use [other than in (i) and (ii)]
occupying more than one fifth of the total floor area of the
building or compartment.
155
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Table A.1
Classification of purpose groups
Purpose for which the building or compartment of a
building is intended to be used
Title
Group
1(a)
Flat
Residential*+
(Dwellings)
1(b)
Dwellinghouse which contains a habitable storey with a floor level which is more than
4.5 m above ground level
1(c)
Dwellinghouse which does not contain a habitable storey with a floor level which is more
than 4.5 m above ground level
Residential
(Institutional)
2(a)
Hospital, nursing home, home for old people or for children, school or other similar
establishment used as living accommodation or for the treatment, care or maintenance
of people suffering from illness or mental or physical disability, place of detention, where
such people sleep on the premises
(Other)
2(b)
Hotel, boarding house, residential college, hall of residence, hostel, house in multiple
occupation, and any other residential purpose not described above
Office
3
Offices or premises used for the purpose of administration, clerical work (including
writing, book keeping, sorting papers, filing, typing, duplicating, machine calculating,
drawing and the editorial preparation of matter for publication, police and fire service
work), handling money (including banking and building society work), and
communications (including postal, telegraph and radio communications) or radio,
television, film, audio or video recording, or performance (not open to the public) and
their control
Shop and
Commercial
4
Shops or premises used for a retail trade or business (including the sale to members of
the public of food or drink for immediate consumption and retail by auction, self-selection
and over-the-counter wholesale trading, the business of lending books or periodicals for
gain and the business of a barber or hairdresser) and premises to which the public is
invited to deliver or to collect goods in connection with their hire, repair or other
treatment, or (except in the case of repair of motor vehicles) where they themselves may
carry out such repairs or other treatments
Assembly and
Recreation
5
Place of assembly, entertainment or recreation, including bingo halls, broadcasting,
recording and film studios open to the public, casinos, dance halls, entertainment,
conference, exhibition and leisure centres, funfairs and amusement arcades, museums
and art galleries, non-residential clubs, theatres, cinemas and concert halls, educational
establishments, dancing schools, gymnasia, swimming pool buildings, riding schools,
skating rinks, sports pavilions, sports stadia, law courts, churches and other buildings for
worship, crematoria, libraries open to the public, non-residential day centres, clinics,
health centres and surgeries, passenger stations and termini for air, rail, road or sea
travel, public toilets, zoos and menageries
Industrial
6
Factories and other premises used for manufacturing, altering, repairing, cleaning,
washing, breaking-up, adapting or processing any article, generating power, or
slaughtering livestock
Storage and other
non-residential+
7(a)
Place for the storage or deposit of goods or materials [other than described under 7(b)]
and any building not within any of the Purpose Groups 1 to 6
7(b)
Car parks designed to admit and accommodate only cars, motorcycles and passenger or
light goods vehicles weighing no more than 2500 kg gross
Notes:
*
Purpose Group 1 includes –
(a) any surgeries, consulting rooms, offices or similar accommodation not more than 50 m2 in total floor area,
forming part of a dwelling and used by an occupant of the dwelling in a professional or business capacity; and
(b) an attached garage not more than 40 m2 in floor area.
+
A detached garage or open carport not more than 40 m2 in floor area is included in Purpose Group 1(c); as is a
detached building which consists of a garage and open carport where neither the garage nor open carport
exceeds 40 m2 in area.
156
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Appendix B
Rules for measurement
Rules for measurement
B.1
In this Technical Booklet the following rules for measurement apply –
(a) The area of a roof, rooflight or floor should be measured as shown in
Diagram B.1.
(b) The cubic capacity of a building, separated part or compartment
should be measured (as shown in Diagram B.2) from –
(i)
the upper surface of the lowest floor;
(ii) the under surface of roof or ceiling surface as appropriate; and
(iii) the inner surfaces of the enclosing walls or, where there is no
enclosing wall, the outermost edge of the floor.
The volume of internal floors, walls and partitions should be included
for calculation purposes.
(c) The number of storeys in a building or a separated part of a building
should be counted as shown in Diagram B.3, and should exclude
basement storeys.
In a building of Purpose Group 5 a gallery (other than a loading
gallery, fly gallery, stage grid, lighting bridge, or any gallery used for
similar purposes, or provided for the purposes of maintenance or
repair) should be counted as a storey. In a building of any other
purpose group a gallery should not be counted as a storey.
(d) The height of a building should be measured as shown in
Diagram B.4.
(e) The height to a storey (other than when measuring for firefighting shaft
purposes) should be measured from the lowest ground level adjacent
to the building to the upper surface of the floor in that storey, as shown
in Diagram B.5.
(f)
The depth of a basement (other than when measuring for firefighting
shaft purposes) should be measured from the highest ground level
adjacent to the building to the upper surface of the floor of the lowest
basement storey as shown in Diagram B.5.
(g) The width of a doorway should be measured as the clear width when
the door is open as shown in Diagram B.6.
(h) The width of an escape route should be measured at 1.5 m above
floor level or pitch line. The projection of handrails, if less
than 100 mm, and stringers, skirtings and architraves if less
than 30 mm, on either or both sides should be ignored.
157
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram B.1 Areas
see para B.1(a)
A
B
A
B
(i) Lean-to roof
(ii) Flat or monopitch
 
roof
B
A
(iii) Double pitch roof
B A
(iv) Rooflight
(a) Surface area – roofs and rooflights – in
 
each case measure the visible area
door or
window
(i) Building or room
measure to the 
outermost edge
of the floor
where there is
no enclosing wall
(ii) Storey, separated part or compartment
(b) Floor area – in each case measure to
 
the internal surface of enclosing walls
 
and include internal walls and partitions
158
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram B.2 Cubic capacity
Diagram B.4 Height of a building
see para B.1(b)
see para B.1(d)
highest point of
roof slope
mean roof level
lowest point of
roof slope
section
(a) Building
height
highest level of
ground adjacent
to outside walls
mean ground level
lowest level of
ground adjacent
to outside walls
section
(b) Separated part or compartment of a building
(a) Double pitch roof
highest point of
roof
Diagram B.3 Number of storeys
top level of
upstand
mean roof level
lowest point of
roof
see para. B.1(c)
whole building three
storeys
height B
height A
2
1
x
mean ground level
G
use height A or B whichever is greater
basement
(b) Mansard type roof
this separated part
three storeys
this separated part
two storeys
highest point of
roof slope
mean roof level
2
lowest point of
roof slope
1
compartment wall
G
x
height
highest level of
ground adjacent
to outside walls
basement
Notes:
1
Count at the position which gives the greatest
 
number of storeys.
mean ground level
lowest level of
ground adjacent
to outside walls
2
Where X exceeds 1.2 m the building or separated
 
part is considered to have two basement storeys
 
and therefore be a two storey building.
(c) Flat or monopitch roof
159
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Diagram B.5 Height to a storey and depth of a basement
see para B.1(e) and B.1(f)
height to top storey excludes
roof top plant areas and any top 
storeys consisting exclusively of
plant rooms
roof
plant
height to a
storey
highest level of
ground adjacent
to outside walls
lowest level of
ground adjacent
to outside walls
depth of a
basement
Diagram B.6 Width of a doorway
see paras 2.92 and B.1(g)
effective clear width
when door opens more than 90°
effective clear width 
when door opens to 90°
160
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Appendix C
Publications referred to
BS EN ISO 306: 2004 Plastics. Thermoplastic materials.
Determination of Vicat softening temperature (VST).
BS EN ISO 1182: 2002 Reaction to fire tests for building products.
Non-combustibility test.
BS EN ISO 1716: 2002 Reaction to fire tests for building products.
Determination of the heat of combustion.
BS EN ISO 11925 Reaction to fire tests. Ignitability of building
products subjected to direct impingement of flame
Part 2: 2002 Single-flame source test.
BS EN 54-11: 2001 Fire detection and fire alarm systems
Part 11: 2001 Manual call points
AMD 16126 June 2006
AMD 16487 June 2006.
BS EN 81-1: 1998 Safety rules for the construction and installation of
lifts
Part 1: Electric lifts.
BS EN 81-2: 1998 Safety rules for the construction and installation of
lifts
Part 2: Hydraulic lifts.
BS EN 81-58: 2003 Safety rules for the construction and installation of
lifts. Examination and tests.
Part 58: Landing doors fire resistance test.
BS EN 81-72: 2003 Safety rules for the construction and installation of
lifts. Particular applications for passenger and goods passenger lifts
Part 72: Firefighters lifts.
BS EN 771-3: 2003 Specification for masonry units
Part 3: 2003 Aggregate concrete masonry units (dense and lightweight
aggregates)
AMD 16001 February 2006.
BS EN 1125: 2008 Building hardware. Panic exit devices operated by a
horizontal bar, for use on escape routes. Requirements and test
methods.
BS EN 1363 Fire resistance tests
Part 1: 1999 General requirements
Part 2: 1999 Alternative and additional procedures.
161
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

BS EN 1364 Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements
Part 1: 1999 Walls
Part 2: 1999 Ceilings.
BS EN 1365 Fire resistance tests for loadbearing elements
Part 1: 1999 Walls
Part 2: 2000 Floors and roofs
Part 3: 2000 Beams
Part 4: 1999 Columns.
BS EN 1366 Fire resistance tests for service installations
Part 1: 1999 Ducts
Part 2: 1999 Fire dampers.
BS EN 1634: 2004 Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door and
shutter assemblies, openable windows and elements of building
hardware
Part 3: Smoke control test for door and shutter assemblies.
BS EN 1634: 2008 Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door,
shutter and openable window assemblies and elements of building
hardware
Part 1: Fire resistance tests for doors, shutters and openable windows.
Part 2: Fire resistance characterisation test for elements of building
hardware.
BS EN 12101-6: 2005 Smoke and heat control systems
Part 6: Specification for pressure differential systems. Kits.
BS EN 12845: 2004 Fixed firefighting systems. Automatic sprinkler
systems. Design, installation and maintenance.
BS EN 13238: 2001 Reaction to fire tests for building products.
Conditioning procedures and general rules for selection of substrates.
BS EN 13501 Fire classification of construction products and building
elements
Part 1: 2007 Classification using test data from reaction to fire tests
Part 2: 2007 Classification using data from fire resistance tests, excluding
ventilation services
Part 3: 2005 Classification using data from fire resistance tests on
products and elements used in building service installations: fire
resisting ducts and fire dampers
Part 5: 2005 Classification using data from external fire exposure to roofs
tests.
BS EN 13823: 2002 Reaction to fire tests for building products.
Building products excluding floorings exposed to the thermal attack by
a single burning item.
162
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

BS EN 50200: 2006 Method of test for resistance to fire of unprotected
small cables for use in emergency circuits.
DD ENV 1187: 2002, test 4 Test methods for external fire exposure to
roofs
AMD 16344 May 2006.
BS 476: Fire tests on building materials and structures
Part 3: 1958 External fire exposure roof test
Part 3: 2004 Classification and method of test for external fire exposure to
roofs
Part 4: 1970 (1984) Non-combustibility test for materials
AMD 2483 March 1978
AMD 4390 September 1983
Part 6: 1981 Method of test for fire propagation for products
AMD 4329
Part 6: 1989 Method of test for fire propagation for products
Part 7: 1971 Surface spread of flame tests for materials
Part 7: 1987 (1993) Method for classification of the surface spread of
flame of products
AMD 6249 January 1990
AMD 7030 January 1992
AMD 7612 April 1993
Part 7: 1997 Method of test to determine the classification of the surface
spread of flame of products
Part 8: 1972 Test methods and criteria for the fire resistance of elements of
building construction
AMD 1873 January 1976
AMD 3816 November 1981
AMD 4822 May 1985
Part 11: 1982 (1988) Method for assessing the heat emission from building
materials
Part 20: 1987 Method for determination of the fire resistance of elements
of construction (general principles)
AMD 6487 April 1990
Part 21: 1987 Methods for determination of the fire resistance of
loadbearing elements of construction
Part 22: 1987 Methods for determination of the fire resistance of
non-loadbearing elements of construction
Part 23: 1987 Methods for determination of the contribution of components
to the fire resistance of a structure
Part 24: 1987 Method for determination of the fire resistance of ventilation
ducts
163
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Section 31.1: 1983 Methods for measuring smoke penetration through
doorsets and shutter assemblies.
AMD 8366
BS 747: 1977 (1986) Specification for roofing felts
AMD 3775 November 1981
AMD 4609 February 1985
AMD 5101 February 1986.
BS 2782: Method of testing plastic
Part 0: 2004 Introduction.
BS 4514: 1983 Specification for unplasticized PVC soil and ventilating
pipes, fittings and accessories
AMD 4517 June 1984
AMD 5584 November 1987.
BS 5255: 1989 Specification for thermoplastics waste pipe and fittings.
BS 5266: Emergency lighting
Part 1: 2005 Code of practice for the emergency lighting of premises.
BS 5306: Fire extinguishing installations and equipment on premises
Part 1: 1976 (1988) Hydrant systems, hose reels and foam inlets
AMD 4649 August 1984
AMD 5756 February 1988
Part 2: 1990 Specification for sprinkler systems
AMD 9809 January 1998
AMD 9985 April 1998.
BS 5395: Stairs, ladders and walkways
Part 2: 1984 Code of practice for the design of helical and spiral stairs
AMD 6076 July 1989.
BS 5438: 1989 Methods of test for flammability of textile fabrics when
subjected to a small igniting flame applied to the face or bottom edge
of vertically oriented specimens
AMD 6509 June 1990
AMD 8308 December 1994.
BS 5446: Fire detection and fire alarm devices for dwellings
Part 1: 2000 Specifications for smoke alarms
Part 2: 2003 Specification for heat alarms.
BS 5499: Graphical symbols and signs – Safety signs, including fire
safety signs
Part 1: 2002 Specification for geometric shapes, colours and layout
Part 4: 2000 Code of practice for escape route signing
AMD 12082 November 2000.
164
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

BS 5588: Fire precautions in the design, construction and use of
buildings
Part 1: 1990 Code of practice for residential buildings
AMD 7840 September 1993
AMD 14988 December 2004
Part 4: 1998 Code of practice for smoke control using pressure differentials
AMD 10019 April 1998
AMD 13868 December 2002
AMD 14989 December 2004
Part 5: 2004 Access and facilities for fire-fighting
Part 6: 1991 Code of practice for places of assembly
AMD 10212 December 1998
AMD 10443 August 1999
AMD 14990 December 2004
Part 7: 1997 Code of practice for the incorporation of atria in buildings
AMD 10546 August 1999
AMD 14991 December 2004
Part 8: 1999 Code of practice for means of escape for disabled people
AMD 14992 December 2004
Part 9: 1999 Code of practice for ventilation and air conditioning ductwork
AMD 14993 December 2004
Part 10: 1991 Code of practice for shopping complexes
AMD 14994 December 2004.
BS 5839: Fire detection and fire alarm systems for buildings
Part 1: 2002 + A2: 2008 Code of practice for system design, installation,
commissioning and maintenance
AMD 15447 December 2004
A2 March 2008
Part 3: 1988 Specification for automatic release mechanisms for certain
fire protection equipment
AMD 10207 November 1998
AMD 17256 July 2007
Part 6: 2004 Code of practice for the design, installation and maintenance
of fire detection and fire alarm systems in dwellings
Part 8: 1998 Code of practice for the design, installation, commissioning
and maintenance of voice alarm systems
Part 9: 2003 Code of practice for the design, installation, commissioning
and maintenance of emergency voice communication systems.
BS 5867: Specification for fabrics for curtains and drapes
Part 2: 1980 (1993) Flammability requirements
AMD 4319 July 1983.
165
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

BS 5950: Structural use of steelwork in building
Part 8: 2003 Code of practice for fire resistant design.
BS 6387: 1994 Specification for performance requirements for cables
required to maintain circuit integrity under fire conditions.
BS 7346: Components for smoke and heat control systems
Part 6: 2005 Specification for cable systems.
BS 7974: 2001 Application of fire safety engineering principles to the
design of buildings – Code of practice.
BS 9990: 2006 Code of practice for non-automatic fire-fighting systems
in buildings.
BS 9999: 2008 Code of practice for fire safety in the design,
management and use of buildings.
BR 128: 1988 Guidelines for the construction of fire-resisting structural
elements.
BR 135: 1988 Fire performance of external thermal insulation for walls
of multi-storey buildings.
BR 187: 1991 External fire spread: building separation and boundary
distances.
BR 368: 1999 Design methodologies for smoke and heat exhaust
ventilation.
Building Bulletin 100: Design for fire safety in schools: published by
the Department for Children, schools and families.
DOE Circular 12/92 Houses in multiple occupation.
The Fire and Rescue Services (Northern Ireland) Order 2006.
The Fire Safety Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2010.
Guide to fire precautions in premises used as hotels and boarding
houses which require a fire certificate: published by the Home Office.
The International Association of Cold Storage Contractors (European
Division): Design, construction, specification and fire management of
insulated envelopes for temperature controlled environments: Second
Edition 2008.
The Northern Ireland Guide to safety at sports grounds: 2007
published by the Department of Culture, Arts and Leisure.
Northern Ireland Firecode: November 2010.
Safety signs and signals: guidance on regulations: Second edition
2009: published by Health and Safety Executive.
The Steel Construction Institute 2002: Fire and steel construction:
Single Storey Steel Framed Buildings in Fire Boundary Conditions.
DFP Technical Booklet B: 2012
Materials and workmanship
166
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety

Technical Booklets
The following list comprises the series of Technical Booklets prepared by the
Department for the purpose of providing practical guidance with respect to
the technical requirements of the Building Regulations (Northern Ireland)
2012.
Technical Booklet B
Materials and workmanship
Technical Booklet C
Preparation of site and resistance to
contaminants and moisture
Technical Booklet D
Structure
Technical Booklet E
Fire safety
Technical Booklet F1
Conservation of fuel and power in dwellings
Technical Booklet F2
Conservation of fuel and power in buildings other
than dwellings
Technical Booklet G
Resistance to the passage of sound
Technical Booklet H
Stairs, ramps, guarding and protection from
impact
Technical Booklet J
Solid waste in buildings
Technical Booklet K
Ventilation
Technical Booklet L
Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
Technical Booklet N
Drainage
Technical Booklet P
Sanitary appliances, unvented hot water storage
systems and reducing the risk of scalding
Technical Booklet R
Access to and use of buildings
Technical Booklet V
Glazing
Any person who intends to demonstrate compliance with the Building
Regulations by following the guidance given in a Technical Booklet is
advised to ensure that the guidance is current on the date when plans are
deposited or notice given to the district council.
167
Technical Booklet E: 2012
Fire safety